A Course in Game Theory


        Electronic version of “A Course in Game Theory” by
    Martin J. Osborne and Ariel Rubinstein (ISBN 0-262-65040-1)

      Copyright c 1994 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form by any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying,
recording, or information storage and retrieval) without permission in
                      writing from the publisher.

 This file is made freely available with permission of MIT Press. It is
  for your personal use only. You are not permitted to transfer it to
anyone else, to copy it, to include any part of it in any other file, or to
make it available on any website (whether or not password-protected).

                           Version: 2012-9-24.
A Course in Game Theory




Martin J. Osborne
Ariel Rubinstein




The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
Copyright c 1994 Massachusetts Institute of Technology

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any
electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information
storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.

This book was typeset by the authors, who are greatly indebted to Donald Knuth
(the creator of TEX), Leslie Lamport (the creator of LATEX), and Eberhard Mattes
(the creator of emTEX) for generously putting superlative software in the public
domain. Camera-ready copy was produced by Type 2000, Mill Valley, California,
and the book was printed and bound by The Maple-Vail Book Manufacturing
Group, Binghamton, New York.

Osborne, Martin J.
  A course in game theory/Martin J. Osborne, Ariel Rubinstein.
     p.   cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 0-262-15041-7.—ISBN 0-262-65040-1 (pbk.)
  1. Game Theory. I. Rubinstein, Ariel. II. Title.
HB144.O733 1994
658.4’0353–dc20                                                           94-8308
                                                                             CIP
Contents




    Preface   xi

1   Introduction 1
    1.1 Game Theory 1
    1.2 Games and Solutions 2
    1.3 Game Theory and the Theory of Competitive Equilibrium   3
    1.4 Rational Behavior 4
    1.5 The Steady State and Deductive Interpretations 5
    1.6 Bounded Rationality 6
    1.7 Terminology and Notation 6
         Notes 8



I   Strategic Games       9

2   Nash Equilibrium 11
    2.1 Strategic Games 11
    2.2 Nash Equilibrium 14
    2.3 Examples 15
    2.4 Existence of a Nash Equilibrium 19
    2.5 Strictly Competitive Games 21
    2.6 Bayesian Games: Strategic Games with Imperfect
        Information 24
        Notes 29
vi                                                            Contents



3    Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium           31
     3.1 Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium 31
     3.2 Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium    37
     3.3 Correlated Equilibrium 44
     3.4 Evolutionary Equilibrium 48
         Notes 51

4    Rationalizability and Iterated Elimination of Dominated
     Actions 53
     4.1 Rationalizability 53
     4.2 Iterated Elimination of Strictly Dominated Actions 58
     4.3 Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Actions 62
         Notes 64

5    Knowledge and Equilibrium 67
     5.1 A Model of Knowledge 67
     5.2 Common Knowledge 73
     5.3 Can People Agree to Disagree? 75
     5.4 Knowledge and Solution Concepts 76
     5.5 The Electronic Mail Game 81
         Notes 84


II   Extensive Games with Perfect Information                    87
6    Extensive Games with Perfect Information 89
     6.1 Extensive Games with Perfect Information 89
     6.2 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium 97
     6.3 Two Extensions of the Definition of a Game 101
     6.4 The Interpretation of a Strategy 103
     6.5 Two Notable Finite Horizon Games 105
     6.6 Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Strategies    108
         Notes 114

7    Bargaining Games 117
     7.1 Bargaining and Game Theory 117
     7.2 A Bargaining Game of Alternating Offers   118
     7.3 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium 121
     7.4 Variations and Extensions 127
         Notes 131
Contents                                                        vii



8   Repeated Games 133
    8.1 The Basic Idea 133
    8.2 Infinitely Repeated Games vs. Finitely Repeated Games 134
    8.3 Infinitely Repeated Games: Definitions 136
    8.4 Strategies as Machines 140
    8.5 Trigger Strategies: Nash Folk Theorems 143
    8.6 Punishing for a Limited Length of Time: A Perfect Folk
         Theorem for the Limit of Means Criterion 146
    8.7 Punishing the Punisher: A Perfect Folk Theorem for the
         Overtaking Criterion 149
    8.8 Rewarding Players Who Punish: A Perfect Folk Theorem for
         the Discounting Criterion 150
    8.9 The Structure of Subgame Perfect Equilibria Under the
         Discounting Criterion 153
    8.10 Finitely Repeated Games 155
         Notes 160


9   Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games 163
    9.1 Introduction 163
    9.2 Complexity and the Machine Game 164
    9.3 The Structure of the Equilibria of a Machine Game 168
    9.4 The Case of Lexicographic Preferences 172
        Notes 175


10 Implementation Theory 177
   10.1 Introduction 177
   10.2 The Implementation Problem 178
   10.3 Implementation in Dominant Strategies 180
   10.4 Nash Implementation 185
   10.5 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium Implementation   191
        Notes 195
viii                                                        Contents



III    Extensive Games with Imperfect
       Information 197
11 Extensive Games with Imperfect Information 199
   11.1 Extensive Games with Imperfect Information 199
   11.2 Principles for the Equivalence of Extensive Games 204
   11.3 Framing Effects and the Equivalence of Extensive
        Games 209
   11.4 Mixed and Behavioral Strategies 212
   11.5 Nash Equilibrium 216
        Notes 217

12 Sequential Equilibrium 219
   12.1 Strategies and Beliefs 219
   12.2 Sequential Equilibrium 222
   12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian
        Equilibrium 231
   12.4 Refinements of Sequential Equilibrium 243
   12.5 Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium 246
        Notes 254


IV     Coalitional Games       255
13 The Core 257
   13.1 Coalitional Games with Transferable Payoff 257
   13.2 The Core 258
   13.3 Nonemptiness of the Core 262
   13.4 Markets with Transferable Payoff 263
   13.5 Coalitional Games without Transferable Payoff 268
   13.6 Exchange Economies 269
        Notes 274

14 Stable Sets, the Bargaining Set, and the Shapley
   Value 277
   14.1 Two Approaches 277
   14.2 The Stable Sets of von Neumann and Morgenstern 278
   14.3 The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus 281
   14.4 The Shapley Value 289
        Notes 297
Contents                                                       ix



15 The Nash Solution 299
   15.1 Bargaining Problems 299
   15.2 The Nash Solution: Definition and Characterization 301
   15.3 An Axiomatic Definition 305
   15.4 The Nash Solution and the Bargaining Game of Alternating
        Offers 310
   15.5 An Exact Implementation of the Nash Solution 311
        Notes 312

    List of Results     313

    References    321

    Index   341
Preface




This book presents some of the main ideas of game theory. It is designed
to serve as a textbook for a one-semester graduate course consisting of
about 28 meetings each of 90 minutes.
   The topics that we cover are those that we personally would include
in such a one-semester course. We do not pretend to provide a complete
reference book on game theory and do not necessarily regard the topics
that we exclude as unimportant. Our selection inevitably reflects our
own preferences and interests. (Were we to start writing the book now
we would probably add two chapters, one on experimental game theory
and one on learning and evolution.)
   We emphasize the foundations of the theory and the interpretation of
the main concepts. Our style is to give precise definitions and full proofs
of results, sacrificing generality and limiting the scope of the material
when necessary to most easily achieve these goals.
   We have made a serious effort to give credit for all the concepts,
results, examples, and exercises (see the “Notes” at the end of each
chapter). We regret any errors and encourage you to draw our attention
to them.


Structure of the Book

The book consists of four parts; in each part we study a group of related
models. The chart on the next page summarizes the interactions among
the chapters. A basic course could consist of Chapters 2, 3, 6, 11, 12,
and 13.
xii                                                                                       Preface




                               Part I: Strategic games

                                                       *
                                                              3: Mixed equilibrium
                                                                        ..
                                              
                                          ......
                                            .... ........
                                                                           ?
           2: Nash equilibrium                          -       4: Rationalizability
       ..                                       ....                       ..
        ..                                          ....
         ..                                             ..                  ?
          ..                                            j                5: Knowledge
           ..
            ..
             ..
              .. Part II: Extensive games with perfect information
               ..
                ..
                 ..                                                      7: Bargaining
                  ..
                   ..                                            
                                                                  >
                    ..
                     .                                 
                                                            
                      ?                                        :
                                                                     8: Repeated games
                       6: Extensive, perfect info. 
                                                       
                                                                               ..
                                                   ...
                                                      ...                       ?
                                                         ...             9: Complexity
                                                            ...
                                                               ...
                                                                  ...
                                                                10: Implementation
                                                                  ~


        Part III: Extensive games with imperfect information
       ?
      11: Extensive, imperfect info.                    - 12: Sequential equilibrium


                             Part IV: Coalitional games

                                                     ......   14: Stable sets, barg. set
                                          ........
                                                         :
                  13: Core
                                                              15: Nash barg. solution



The main interactions between the chapters. The areas of the boxes in which the
names of the chapters appear are proportional to the lengths of the chapters. A
solid arrow connecting two boxes indicates that one chapter depends on the other; a
dotted arrow indicates that only the main ideas of one chapter are used in the other.
A basic course could consist of the six chapters in heavy boxes.
Preface                                                                 xiii



Exercises
Many of the exercises are challenging; we often use exercises to state
subsidiary results. Instructors will probably want to assign additional
straightforward problems and adjust (by giving hints) the level of our ex-
ercises to make it appropriate for their students. Solutions are available
to instructors on the web site for the book (see page xv).

Disagreements Between the Authors
We see no reason why a jointly authored book should reflect a uniform
view. At several points, as in the following note, we briefly discuss issues
about which we disagree.

A Note on Personal Pronouns
We disagree about how to handle English third-person singular pro-
nouns.
   ar argues that we should use a “neutral” pronoun and agrees to the
use of “he”, with the understanding that this refers to both men and
women. Continuous reminders of the he/she issue simply divert the
reader’s attention from the main issues. Language is extremely impor-
tant in shaping our thinking, but in academic material it is not useful
to wave it as a flag, as is common in some circles.
   mjo argues that no language is “neutral”. In particular, there is a
wealth of evidence, both from experiments and from analyses of lan-
guage use, that “he” is not generally perceived to encompass both fe-
males and males. To quote the American Heritage Dictionary (third
edition, page 831), “Thus he is not really a gender-neutral pronoun;
rather it refers to a male who is to be taken as the representative mem-
ber of the group referred to by its antecedent. The traditional usage,
then, is not simply a grammatical convention; it also suggests a par-
ticular pattern of thought.” Further, the use of “he” to refer to an
individual of unspecified sex did not even arise naturally, but was im-
posed as a rule by (male) prescriptive grammarians in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries who were upset by the widespread use of “they” as
a singular pronoun and decided that, since in their opinion men were
more important than women, “he” should be used. The use of “he” to
refer to a generic individual thus both has its origins in sexist attitudes
and promotes such attitudes. There is no neat solution to the problem,
especially in a book such as this in which there are so many references
xiv                                                              Preface



to generic individuals. “They” has many merits as a singular pronoun,
although its use can lead to ambiguities (and complaints from editors).
My preference is to use “she” for all individuals. Obviously this us-
age is not gender-neutral, but its use for a few decades, after a couple
of centuries in which “he” has dominated, seems likely only to help to
eliminate sexist ways of thought. If such usage diverts some readers’
attentions from the subjects discussed in this book and leads them to
contemplate sexism in the use of language, which is surely an issue at
least as significant as the minutiae of sequential equilibrium, then an
increase in social welfare will have been achieved. (Whether or not this
book qualifies as “academic material”, I see no reason why its readers
should be treated differently from those of any other material.)
   To conclude, we both feel strongly on this issue; we both regard the
compromise that we have reached as highly unsatisfactory. When re-
ferring to specific individuals, we sometimes use “he” and sometimes
“she”. For example, in two-player games we treat player 1 as female
and player 2 as male. We use “he” for generic individuals.

Acknowledgements
This book is an outgrowth of courses we have taught and discussions
we have had with many friends and colleagues. Some of the material in
Chapters 5, 8, and 9 is based on parts of a draft of a book on models of
bounded rationality by ar.
   mjo I had the privilege of being educated in game theory by Robert
Aumann, Sergiu Hart, Mordecai Kurz, and Robert Wilson at Stanford
University. It is a great pleasure to acknowledge my debt to them.
Discussions over the years with Jean-Pierre Benoı̂t, Haruo Imai, Vijay
Krishna, and Carolyn Pitchik have improved my understanding of many
topics. I completed my work on the book during a visit to the Depart-
ment of Economics at the University of Canterbury, New Zealand; I am
grateful to the members of the department for their generous hospital-
ity. I am grateful also to the Social Science and Humanities Research
Council of Canada and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada for financially supporting my research in game theory
over the last six years.
   ar I have used parts of this book in courses at the London School
of Economics (1987 and 1988), The Hebrew University (1989), Tel Aviv
University (1990), and Princeton University (1992). The hospitality and
collegiality of the London School of Economics, Princeton University,
Preface                                                              xv



and Tel Aviv University are gratefully appreciated. Special thanks are
due to my friend Asher Wolinsky for endless illuminating conversations.
Part of my work on the book was supported by the United States–Israel
Binational Science Foundation (grant number 1011-341).
  We are grateful to Pierpaolo Battigalli, Takako Fujiwara, Wulong Gu,
Abhinay Muthoo, Michele Piccione, and Doron Sonsino for making very
detailed comments on drafts of the book, comments that led us to sub-
stantially improve the accuracy and readability of the text. We are
grateful also to Dilip Abreu, Jean-Pierre Benoı̂t, Larry Blume, In-Koo
Cho, Eddie Dekel, Faruk Gul, Vijay Krishna, Bart Lipman, Bentley
MacLeod, Sylvain Sorin, Ran Spiegler, and Arthur Sweetman for giving
us advice and pointing out improvements. Finally, we thank Wulong Gu
and Arthur Sweetman, who provided us with outstanding assistance in
completing the book: Wulong worked on the exercises, correcting our
solutions and providing many of his own, and Arthur constructed the
index.
  On the technical side we thank Ed Sznyter for cajoling the ever
recalcitrant TEX to execute our numbering scheme.
  It was a great pleasure to deal with Terry Vaughn of The MIT Press;
his encouragement in the early stages of the project was important in
motivating us to write the book.

Martin J. Osborne
martin.osborne@utoronto.ca
http://www.economics.utoronto.ca/osborne/
Department of Economics, University of Toronto
150 St. George Street, Toronto, Canada, M5S 3G7

Ariel Rubinstein
rariel@post.tau.ac.il
http://arielrubinstein.tau.ac.il
Department of Economics, Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel, 69978
Department of Economics, New York University
New York, NY 10003, USA


We maintain a web site for the book. A link to this site is provided on
The MIT Press page for the book,
  http://mitpress.mit.edu/book-home.tcl?isbn=0262650401
The URL of our site is currently
       http://www.economics.utoronto.ca/osborne/cgt
1          Introduction




1.1   Game Theory

Game theory is a bag of analytical tools designed to help us understand
the phenomena that we observe when decision-makers interact. The ba-
sic assumptions that underlie the theory are that decision-makers pursue
well-defined exogenous objectives (they are rational ) and take into ac-
count their knowledge or expectations of other decision-makers’ behavior
(they reason strategically).
   The models of game theory are highly abstract representations of
classes of real-life situations. Their abstractness allows them to be used
to study a wide range of phenomena. For example, the theory of Nash
equilibrium (Chapter 2) has been used to study oligopolistic and politi-
cal competition. The theory of mixed strategy equilibrium (Chapter 3)
has been used to explain the distributions of tongue length in bees and
tube length in flowers. The theory of repeated games (Chapter 8) has
been used to illuminate social phenomena like threats and promises. The
theory of the core (Chapter 13) reveals a sense in which the outcome
of trading under a price system is stable in an economy that contains
many agents.
   The boundary between pure and applied game theory is vague; some
developments in the pure theory were motivated by issues that arose
in applications. Nevertheless we believe that such a line can be drawn.
Though we hope that this book appeals to those who are interested in
applications, we stay almost entirely in the territory of “pure” theory.
The art of applying an abstract model to a real-life situation should be
the subject of another tome.
   Game theory uses mathematics to express its ideas formally. However,
the game theoretical ideas that we discuss are not inherently mathemat-
2                                                 Chapter 1. Introduction



ical; in principle a book could be written that had essentially the same
content as this one and was devoid of mathematics. A mathematical
formulation makes it easy to define concepts precisely, to verify the con-
sistency of ideas, and to explore the implications of assumptions. Con-
sequently our style is formal: we state definitions and results precisely,
interspersing them with motivations and interpretations of the concepts.
   The use of mathematical models creates independent mathematical
interest. In this book, however, we treat game theory not as a branch
of mathematics but as a social science whose aim is to understand the
behavior of interacting decision-makers; we do not elaborate on points of
mathematical interest. From our point of view the mathematical results
are interesting only if they are confirmed by intuition.

1.2   Games and Solutions

A game is a description of strategic interaction that includes the con-
straints on the actions that the players can take and the players’ in-
terests, but does not specify the actions that the players do take. A
solution is a systematic description of the outcomes that may emerge in
a family of games. Game theory suggests reasonable solutions for classes
of games and examines their properties.
   We study four groups of game theoretic models, indicated by the titles
of the four parts of the book: strategic games (Part I), extensive games
with and without perfect information (Parts II and III), and coalitional
games (Part IV). We now explain some of the dimensions on which this
division is based.

Noncooperative and Cooperative Games
In all game theoretic models the basic entity is a player. A player may be
interpreted as an individual or as a group of individuals making a deci-
sion. Once we define the set of players, we may distinguish between two
types of models: those in which the sets of possible actions of individual
players are primitives (Parts I, II, and III) and those in which the sets
of possible joint actions of groups of players are primitives (Part IV).
Sometimes models of the first type are referred to as “noncooperative”,
while those of the second type are referred to as “cooperative” (though
these terms do not express well the differences between the models).
   The numbers of pages that we devote to each of these branches of
the theory reflect the fact that in recent years most research has been
1.3 Game Theory and the Theory of Competitive Equilibrium                3



devoted to noncooperative games; it does not express our evaluation of
the relative importance of the two branches. In particular, we do not
share the view of some authors that noncooperative models are more
“basic” than cooperative ones; in our opinion, neither group of models
is more “basic” than the other.

Strategic Games and Extensive Games
In Part I we discuss the concept of a strategic game and in Parts II
and III the concept of an extensive game. A strategic game is a model
of a situation in which each player chooses his plan of action once and
for all, and all players’ decisions are made simultaneously (that is, when
choosing a plan of action each player is not informed of the plan of action
chosen by any other player). By contrast, the model of an extensive game
specifies the possible orders of events; each player can consider his plan
of action not only at the beginning of the game but also whenever he
has to make a decision.

Games with Perfect and Imperfect Information
The third distinction that we make is between the models in Parts II
and III. In the models in Part II the participants are fully informed
about each others’ moves, while in the models in Part III they may be
imperfectly informed. The former models have firmer foundations. The
latter were developed intensively only in the 1980s; we put less emphasis
on them not because they are less realistic or important but because they
are less mature.

1.3   Game Theory and the Theory of Competitive
      Equilibrium

To clarify further the nature of game theory, we now contrast it with the
theory of competitive equilibrium that is used in economics. Game theo-
retic reasoning takes into account the attempts by each decision-maker to
obtain, prior to making his decision, information about the other play-
ers’ behavior, while competitive reasoning assumes that each agent is
interested only in some environmental parameters (such as prices), even
though these parameters are determined by the actions of all agents.
   To illustrate the difference between the theories, consider an envi-
ronment in which the level of some activity (like fishing) of each agent
depends on the level of pollution, which in turn depends on the levels of
4                                                  Chapter 1. Introduction



the agents’ activities. In a competitive analysis of this situation we look
for a level of pollution consistent with the actions that the agents take
when each of them regards this level as given. By contrast, in a game
theoretic analysis of the situation we require that each agent’s action
be optimal given the agent’s expectation of the pollution created by the
combination of his action and all the other agents’ actions.

1.4      Rational Behavior

The models we study assume that each decision-maker is “rational” in
the sense that he is aware of his alternatives, forms expectations about
any unknowns, has clear preferences, and chooses his action deliberately
after some process of optimization. In the absence of uncertainty the
following elements constitute a model of rational choice.
    •   A set A of actions from which the decision-maker makes a choice.
    •   A set C of possible consequences of these actions.
    •   A consequence function g: A → C that associates a consequence
        with each action.
    •   A preference relation (a complete transitive reflexive binary rela-
        tion) % on the set C.
Sometimes the decision-maker’s preferences are specified by giving a
utility function U : C → R, which defines a preference relation % by the
condition x % y if and only if U (x) ≥ U (y).
   Given any set B ⊆ A of actions that are feasible in some particular
case, a rational decision-maker chooses an action a∗ that is feasible
(belongs to B) and optimal in the sense that g(a∗ ) % g(a) for all a ∈ B;
alternatively he solves the problem maxa∈B U (g(a)). An assumption
upon which the usefulness of this model of decision-making depends is
that the individual uses the same preference relation when choosing from
different sets B.
   In the models we study, individuals often have to make decisions under
conditions of uncertainty. The players may be
    •   uncertain about the objective parameters of the environment
    •   imperfectly informed about events that happen in the game
    •   uncertain about actions of the other players that are not determin-
        istic
    •   uncertain about the reasoning of the other players.
1.5 The Steady State and Deductive Interpretations                        5



To model decision-making under uncertainty, almost all game theory
uses the theories of von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944) and of Sav-
age (1972). That is, if the consequence function is stochastic and known
to the decision-maker (i.e. for each a ∈ A the consequence g(a) is a lot-
tery (probability distribution) on C) then the decision-maker is assumed
to behave as if he maximizes the expected value of a (von Neumann–
Morgenstern utility) function that attaches a number to each conse-
quence. If the stochastic connection between actions and consequences
is not given, the decision-maker is assumed to behave as if he has in mind
a (subjective) probability distribution that determines the consequence
of any action. In this case the decision-maker is assumed to behave as
if he has in mind a “state space” Ω, a probability measure over Ω, a
function g: A × Ω → C, and a utility function u: C → R; he is assumed
to choose an action a that maximizes the expected value of u(g(a, ω))
with respect to the probability measure.
   We do not discuss the assumptions that underlie the theory of a ratio-
nal decision-maker. However, we do point out that these assumptions are
under perpetual attack by experimental psychologists, who constantly
point out severe limits to its application.

1.5   The Steady State and Deductive Interpretations

There are two conflicting interpretations of solutions for strategic and
extensive games. The steady state (or, as Binmore (1987/88) calls it,
evolutive) interpretation is closely related to that which is standard in
economics. Game theory, like other sciences, deals with regularities. As
Carnap (1966, p. 3) writes, “The observations we make in everyday life
as well as the more systematic observations of science reveal certain rep-
etitions or regularities in the world. . . . The laws of science are nothing
more than statements expressing these regularities as precisely as possi-
ble.” The steady state interpretation treats a game as a model designed
to explain some regularity observed in a family of similar situations.
Each participant “knows” the equilibrium and tests the optimality of
his behavior given this knowledge, which he has acquired from his long
experience. The deductive (or, as Binmore calls it, eductive) interpreta-
tion, by contrast, treats a game in isolation, as a “one-shot” event, and
attempts to infer the restrictions that rationality imposes on the out-
come; it assumes that each player deduces how the other players will be-
have simply from principles of rationality. We try to avoid the confusion
between the two interpretations that frequently arises in game theory.
6                                                  Chapter 1. Introduction



1.6   Bounded Rationality

When we talk in real life about games we often focus on the asymmetry
between individuals in their abilities. For example, some players may
have a clearer perception of a situation or have a greater ability to ana-
lyze it. These differences, which are so critical in life, are missing from
game theory in its current form.
   To illustrate the consequences of this fact, consider the game of chess.
In an actual play of chess the players may differ in their knowledge
of the legal moves and in their analytical abilities. In contrast, when
chess is modeled using current game theory it is assumed that the play-
ers’ knowledge of the rules of the game is perfect and their ability to
analyze it is ideal. Results we prove in Chapters 2 and 6 (Proposi-
tions 22.2 and 99.2) imply that chess is a trivial game for “rational”
players: an algorithm exists that can be used to “solve” the game. This
algorithm defines a pair of strategies, one for each player, that leads
to an “equilibrium” outcome with the property that a player who fol-
lows his strategy can be sure that the outcome will be at least as good
as the equilibrium outcome no matter what strategy the other player
uses. The existence of such strategies suggests that chess is uninter-
esting because it has only one possible outcome. Nevertheless, chess
remains a very popular and interesting game. Its equilibrium outcome
is yet to be calculated; currently it is impossible to do so using the algo-
rithm. Even if White, for example, is shown one day to have a winning
strategy, it may not be possible for a human being to implement that
strategy. Thus while the abstract model of chess allows us to deduce
a significant fact about the game, at the same time it omits the most
important determinant of the outcome of an actual play of chess: the
players’ “abilities”.
   Modeling asymmetries in abilities and in perceptions of a situation
by different players is a fascinating challenge for future research, which
models of “bounded rationality” have begun to tackle.

1.7   Terminology and Notation

We presume little familiarity with mathematical results, but throughout
use deductive reasoning. Our notation and mathematical definitions are
standard, but to avoid ambiguities we list some of them here.
  We denote the set of real numbers by R, the set of nonnegative real
numbers by R+ , the set of vectors of n real numbers by Rn , and the set of
1.7 Terminology and Notation                                                7



vectors of n nonnegative real numbers by Rn+ . For x ∈ Rn and y ∈ Rn
we use x ≥ y to mean xi ≥ yi for i = 1, . . . , n and x > y to mean
xi > yi for i = 1, . . . , n. We say that a function f : R → R is increasing
if f (x) > f (y) whenever x > y and is nondecreasing if f (x) ≥ f (y)
whenever x > y. A function f : R → R is concave if f (αx + (1 − α)x0 ) ≥
αf (x) + (1 − α)f (x0 ) for all x ∈ R, all x0 ∈ R, and all α ∈ [0, 1]. Given a
function f : X → R we denote by arg maxx∈X f (x) the set of maximizers
of f ; for any Y ⊆ X we denote by f (Y ) the set {f (x): x ∈ Y }.
   Throughout we use N to denote the set of players. We refer to a
collection of values of some variable, one for each player, as a profile;
we denote such a profile by (xi )i∈N , or, if the qualifier “i ∈ N ” is clear,
simply (xi ). For any profile x = (xj )j∈N and any i ∈ N we let x−i be
the list (xj )j∈N \{i} of elements of the profile x for all players except i.
Given a list x−i = (xj )j∈N \{i} and an element xi we denote by (x−i , xi )
the profile (xi )i∈N . If Xi is a set for each i ∈ N then we denote by X−i
the set ×j∈N \{i} Xj .
   A binary relation % on a set A is complete if a % b or b % a for every
a ∈ A and b ∈ A, reflexive if a % a for every a ∈ A, and transitive if
a % c whenever a % b and b % c. A preference relation is a complete
reflexive transitive binary relation. If a % b but not b % a then we write
a  b; if a % b and b % a then we write a ∼ b. A preference relation
% on A is continuous if a % b whenever there are sequences (ak )k and
(bk )k in A that converge to a and b respectively for which ak % bk for
all k. A preference relation % on Rn is quasi-concave if for every b ∈ Rn
the set {a ∈ Rn : a % b} is convex; it is strictly quasi-concave if every
such set is strictly convex.
   Let X be a set. We denote by |X| the number of members of X. A
partition of X is a collection of disjoint subsets of X whose union is X.
Let N be a finite set and let X ⊆ RN be a set. Then x ∈ X is Pareto
efficient if there is no y ∈ X for which yi > xi for all i ∈ N ; x ∈ X is
strongly Pareto efficient if there is no y ∈ X for which yi ≥ xi for all
i ∈ N and yi > xi for some i ∈ N .
   A probability measure µ on a finite (or countable) set X is an additive
function that associates a nonnegative real number with every subset of
X (that is, µ(B ∪ C) = µ(B) + µ(C) whenever B and C are disjoint) and
satisfies µ(X) = 1. In some cases we work with probability measures
over spaces that are not necessarily finite. If you are unfamiliar with
such measures, little is lost by restricting attention to the finite case;
for a definition of more general measures see, for example, Chung (1974,
Ch. 2).
8                                                Chapter 1. Introduction



Notes

Von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944) is the classic work in game the-
ory. Luce and Raiffa (1957) is an early textbook; although now out-of-
date, it contains superb discussions of the basic concepts in the theory.
Schelling (1960) provides a verbal discussion of some of the main ideas
of the theory.
   A number of recent books cover much of the material in this book,
at approximately the same level: Shubik (1982), Moulin (1986), Fried-
man (1990), Kreps (1990a, Part III), Fudenberg and Tirole (1991a), My-
erson (1991), van Damme (1991), and Binmore (1992). Gibbons (1992)
is a more elementary introduction to the subject.
   Aumann (1985b) contains a discussion of the aims and achievements
of game theory, and Aumann (1987b) is an account of game theory from
a historical perspective. Binmore (1987/88) is a critical discussion of
game theory that makes the distinction between the steady state and
deductive interpretations. Kreps (1990b) is a reflective discussion of
many issues in game theory.
   For an exposition of the theory of rational choice see Kreps (1988).
I          Strategic Games




In this part we study a model of strategic interaction known as a strategic
game, or, in the terminology of von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944),
a “game in normal form”. This model specifies for each player a set of
possible actions and a preference ordering over the set of possible action
profiles.
   In Chapter 2 we discuss Nash equilibrium, the most widely used solu-
tion concept for strategic games. In Chapter 3 we consider the closely re-
lated solutions of mixed strategy equilibrium and correlated equilibrium,
in which the players’ actions are not necessarily deterministic. Nash
equilibrium is a steady state solution concept in which each player’s de-
cision depends on knowledge of the equilibrium. In Chapter 4 we study
the deductive solution concepts of rationalizability and iterated elimina-
tion of dominated actions, in which the players are not assumed to know
the equilibrium. Chapter 5 describes a model of knowledge that allows
us to examine formally the assumptions that underlie the solutions that
we have defined.
  2            Nash Equilibrium




  Nash equilibrium is one of the most basic concepts in game theory. In
  this chapter we describe it in the context of a strategic game and in the
  related context of a Bayesian game.

  2.1     Strategic Games

  2.1.1    Definition
  A strategic game is a model of interactive decision-making in which each
  decision-maker chooses his plan of action once and for all, and these
  choices are made simultaneously. The model consists of a finite set N of
  players and, for each player i, a set Ai of actions and a preference relation
  on the set of action profiles. We refer to an action profile a = (aj )j∈N
  as an outcome, and denote the set ×j∈N Aj of outcomes by A. The
  requirement that the preferences of each player i be defined over A,
  rather than Ai , is the feature that distinguishes a strategic game from a
  decision problem: each player may care not only about his own action
  but also about the actions taken by the other players. To summarize,
  our definition is the following.
I Definition 11.1 A strategic game consists of
   •    a finite set N (the set of players)
   •    for each player i ∈ N a nonempty set Ai (the set of actions available
        to player i)
   •    for each player i ∈ N a preference relation %i on A = ×j∈N Aj (the
        preference relation of player i).
  If the set Ai of actions of every player i is finite then the game is finite.
12                                            Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium



   The high level of abstraction of this model allows it to be applied to a
wide variety of situations. A player may be an individual human being
or any other decision-making entity like a government, a board of direc-
tors, the leadership of a revolutionary movement, or even a flower or an
animal. The model places no restrictions on the set of actions available
to a player, which may, for example, contain just a few elements or be a
huge set containing complicated plans that cover a variety of contingen-
cies. However, the range of application of the model is limited by the
requirement that we associate with each player a preference relation. A
player’s preference relation may simply reflect the player’s feelings about
the possible outcomes or, in the case of an organism that does not act
consciously, the chances of its reproductive success.
   The fact that the model is so abstract is a merit to the extent that
it allows applications in a wide range of situations, but is a drawback
to the extent that the implications of the model cannot depend on any
specific features of a situation. Indeed, very few conclusions can be
reached about the outcome of a game at this level of abstraction; one
needs to be much more specific to derive interesting results.
   In some situations the players’ preferences are most naturally defined
not over action profiles but over their consequences. When modeling an
oligopoly, for example, we may take the set of players to be a set of firms
and the set of actions of each firm to be the set of prices; but we may
wish to model the assumption that each firm cares only about its profit,
not about the profile of prices that generates that profit. To do so we
introduce a set C of consequences, a function g: A → C that associates
consequences with action profiles, and a profile (%∗i ) of preference rela-
tions over C. Then the preference relation %i of each player i in the
strategic game is defined as follows: a %i b if and only if g(a) %∗i g(b).
   Sometimes we wish to model a situation in which the consequence
of an action profile is affected by an exogenous random variable whose
realization is not known to the players before they take their actions.
We can model such a situation as a strategic game by introducing a set
C of consequences, a probability space Ω, and a function g: A × Ω → C
with the interpretation that g(a, ω) is the consequence when the action
profile is a ∈ A and the realization of the random variable is ω ∈ Ω. A
profile of actions induces a lottery on C; for each player i a preference
relation %∗i must be specified over the set of all such lotteries. Player i’s
preference relation in the strategic game is defined as follows: a %i b
if and only if the lottery over C induced by g(a, ·) is at least as good
according to %∗i as the lottery induced by g(b, ·).
2.1 Strategic Games                                                         13



                                   L         R

                           T    w1 , w2    x1 , x2

                           B     y1 , y2   z1 , z2

Figure 13.1 A convenient representation of a two-player strategic game in which
each player has two actions.


   Under a wide range of circumstances the preference relation %i of
player i in a strategic game can be represented by a payoff function
ui : A → R (also called a utility function), in the sense that ui (a) ≥ ui (b)
whenever a %i b. We refer to values of such a function as payoffs (or
utilities). Frequently we specify a player’s preference relation by giving
a payoff function that represents it. In such a case we denote the game
by hN, (Ai ), (ui )i rather than hN, (Ai ), (%i )i.
   A finite strategic game in which there are two players can be described
conveniently in a table like that in Figure 13.1. One player’s actions are
identified with the rows and the other player’s with the columns. The
two numbers in the box formed by row r and column c are the players’
payoffs when the row player chooses r and the column player chooses
c, the first component being the payoff of the row player. Thus in the
game in Figure 13.1 the set of actions of the row player is {T, B} and
that of the column player is {L, R}, and for example the row player’s
payoff from the outcome (T, L) is w1 and the column player’s payoff is
w2 . If the players’ names are “1” and “2” then the convention is that
the row player is player 1 and the column player is player 2.

2.1.2   Comments on Interpretation
A common interpretation of a strategic game is that it is a model of an
event that occurs only once; each player knows the details of the game
and the fact that all the players are “rational” (see Section 1.4), and the
players choose their actions simultaneously and independently. Under
this interpretation each player is unaware, when choosing his action, of
the choices being made by the other players; there is no information
(except the primitives of the model) on which a player can base his
expectation of the other players’ behavior.
  Another interpretation, which we adopt through most of this book, is
that a player can form his expectation of the other players’ behavior on
  14                                                 Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium



  the basis of information about the way that the game or a similar game
  was played in the past (see Section 1.5). A sequence of plays of the game
  can be modeled by a strategic game only if there are no strategic links
  between the plays. That is, an individual who plays the game many
  times must be concerned only with his instantaneous payoff and ignore
  the effects of his current action on the other players’ future behavior.
  In this interpretation it is thus appropriate to model a situation as a
  strategic game only in the absence of an intertemporal strategic link
  between occurrences of the interaction. (The model of a repeated game
  discussed in Chapter 8 deals with series of strategic interactions in which
  such intertemporal links do exist.)
     When referring to the actions of the players in a strategic game as
  “simultaneous” we do not necessarily mean that these actions are taken
  at the same point in time. One situation that can be modeled as a
  strategic game is the following. The players are at different locations,
  in front of terminals. First the players’ possible actions and payoffs
  are described publicly (so that they are common knowledge among the
  players). Then each player chooses an action by sending a message to a
  central computer; the players are informed of their payoffs when all the
  messages have been received. However, the model of a strategic game is
  much more widely applicable than this example suggests. For a situation
  to be modeled as a strategic game it is important only that the players
  make decisions independently, no player being informed of the choice of
  any other player prior to making his own decision.

  2.2   Nash Equilibrium

  The most commonly used solution concept in game theory is that of
  Nash equilibrium. This notion captures a steady state of the play of a
  strategic game in which each player holds the correct expectation about
  the other players’ behavior and acts rationally. It does not attempt to
  examine the process by which a steady state is reached.
I Definition 14.1 A Nash equilibrium of a strategic game hN, (Ai ),
  (%i )i is a profile a∗ ∈ A of actions with the property that for every
  player i ∈ N we have

                    (a∗−i , a∗i ) %i (a∗−i , ai ) for all ai ∈ Ai .

    Thus for a∗ to be a Nash equilibrium it must be that no player i has
  an action yielding an outcome that he prefers to that generated when
 2.3 Examples                                                                      15



 he chooses a∗i , given that every other player j chooses his equilibrium
 action a∗j . Briefly, no player can profitably deviate, given the actions of
 the other players.
   The following restatement of the definition is sometimes useful. For
 any a−i ∈ A−i define Bi (a−i ) to be the set of player i’s best actions
 given a−i :

       Bi (a−i ) = {ai ∈ Ai : (a−i , ai ) %i (a−i , a0i ) for all a0i ∈ Ai }.   (15.1)

 We call the set-valued function Bi the best-response function of
 player i. A Nash equilibrium is a profile a∗ of actions for which

                             a∗i ∈ Bi (a∗−i ) for all i ∈ N.                    (15.2)

    This alternative formulation of the definition points us to a (not nec-
 essarily efficient) method of finding Nash equilibria: first calculate the
 best response function of each player, then find a profile a∗ of actions for
 which a∗i ∈ Bi (a∗−i ) for all i ∈ N . If the functions Bi are singleton-valued
 then the second step entails solving |N | equations in the |N | unknowns
 (a∗i )i∈N .

 2.3     Examples

 The following classical games represent a variety of strategic situations.
 The games are very simple: in each game there are just two players
 and each player has only two possible actions. Nevertheless, each game
 captures the essence of a type of strategic interaction that is frequently
 present in more complex situations.
 Example 15.3 (Bach or Stravinsky? (BoS)) Two people wish to go out
  together to a concert of music by either Bach or Stravinsky. Their main
  concern is to go out together, but one person prefers Bach and the other
  person prefers Stravinsky. Representing the individuals’ preferences by
  payoff functions, we have the game in Figure 16.1.
     This game is often referred to as the “Battle of the Sexes”; for the
  standard story behind it see Luce and Raiffa (1957, pp. 90–91). For
  consistency with this nomenclature we call the game “BoS”. BoS models
  a situation in which players wish to coordinate their behavior, but have
  conflicting interests. The game has two Nash equilibria: (Bach, Bach)
  and (Stravinsky, Stravinsky). That is, there are two steady states: one
  in which both players always choose Bach and one in which they always
  choose Stravinsky.
 16                                            Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium



                                    Bach       Stravinsky

                        Bach         2, 1          0, 0

                   Stravinsky        0, 0          1, 2

             Figure 16.1 Bach or Stravinsky? (BoS) (Example 15.3).


                                  Mozart     Mahler

                        Mozart       2, 2      0, 0

                        Mahler       0, 0      1, 1

               Figure 16.2 A coordination game (Example 16.1).


 Example 16.1 (A coordination game) As in BoS, two people wish to go
  out together, but in this case they agree on the more desirable concert.
  A game that captures this situation is given in Figure 16.2.
    Like BoS, the game has two Nash equilibria: (Mozart, Mozart) and
  (Mahler, Mahler ). In contrast to BoS, the players have a mutual interest
  in reaching one of these equilibria, namely (Mozart, Mozart); however,
  the notion of Nash equilibrium does not rule out a steady state in which
  the outcome is the inferior equilibrium (Mahler, Mahler ).
 Example 16.2 (The Prisoner’s Dilemma) Two suspects in a crime are
  put into separate cells. If they both confess, each will be sentenced to
  three years in prison. If only one of them confesses, he will be freed
  and used as a witness against the other, who will receive a sentence of
  four years. If neither confesses, they will both be convicted of a minor
  offense and spend one year in prison. Choosing a convenient payoff
  representation for the preferences, we have the game in Figure 17.1.
     This is a game in which there are gains from cooperation—the best
  outcome for the players is that neither confesses—but each player has
  an incentive to be a “free rider”. Whatever one player does, the other
  prefers Confess to Don’t Confess, so that the game has a unique Nash
  equilibrium (Confess, Confess).
 Example 16.3 (Hawk–Dove) Two animals are fighting over some prey.
  Each can behave like a dove or like a hawk. The best outcome for
 2.3 Examples                                                               17



                               Don’t Confess           Confess

              Don’t confess          3, 3                0, 4

                    Confess          4, 0                1, 1

              Figure 17.1 The Prisoner’s Dilemma (Example 16.2).


                                    Dove     Hawk

                            Dove     3, 3      1, 4

                           Hawk      4, 1      0, 0

                    Figure 17.2 Hawk–Dove (Example 16.3).


 each animal is that in which it acts like a hawk while the other acts
 like a dove; the worst outcome is that in which both animals act like
 hawks. Each animal prefers to be hawkish if its opponent is dovish and
 dovish if its opponent is hawkish. A game that captures this situation is
 shown in Figure 17.2. The game has two Nash equilibria, (Dove, Hawk )
 and (Hawk, Dove), corresponding to two different conventions about the
 player who yields.

 Example 17.1 (Matching Pennies) Each of two people chooses either
  Head or Tail. If the choices differ, person 1 pays person 2 a dollar; if they
  are the same, person 2 pays person 1 a dollar. Each person cares only
  about the amount of money that he receives. A game that models this
  situation is shown in Figure 17.3. Such a game, in which the interests of
  the players are diametrically opposed, is called “strictly competitive”.
  The game Matching Pennies has no Nash equilibrium.


                                    Head       Tail

                          Head       1, −1   −1, 1

                           Tail    −1, 1       1, −1

                 Figure 17.3 Matching Pennies (Example 17.1).
 18                                             Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium



   The notion of a strategic game encompasses situations much more
 complex than those described in the last five examples. The following
 are representatives of three families of games that have been studied
 extensively: auctions, games of timing, and location games.
 Example 18.1 (An auction) An object is to be assigned to a player in
  the set {1, . . . , n} in exchange for a payment. Player i’s valuation of the
  object is vi , and v1 > v2 > · · · > vn > 0. The mechanism used to assign
  the object is a (sealed-bid) auction: the players simultaneously submit
  bids (nonnegative numbers), and the object is given to the player with
  the lowest index among those who submit the highest bid, in exchange
  for a payment.
    In a first price auction the payment that the winner makes is the price
  that he bids.
? Exercise 18.2   Formulate a first price auction as a strategic game and
 analyze its Nash equilibria. In particular, show that in all equilibria
 player 1 obtains the object.
   In a second price auction the payment that the winner makes is the
 highest bid among those submitted by the players who do not win (so
 that if only one player submits the highest bid then the price paid is the
 second highest bid).
? Exercise 18.3     Show that in a second price auction the bid vi of any
 player i is a weakly dominant action: player i’s payoff when he bids vi is
 at least as high as his payoff when he submits any other bid, regardless
 of the actions of the other players. Show that nevertheless there are
 (“inefficient”) equilibria in which the winner is not player 1.
 Example 18.4 (A war of attrition) Two players are involved in a dis-
  pute over an object. The value of the object to player i is vi > 0. Time
  is modeled as a continuous variable that starts at 0 and runs indefinitely.
  Each player chooses when to concede the object to the other player; if
  the first player to concede does so at time t, the other player obtains the
  object at that time. If both players concede simultaneously, the object
  is split equally between them, player i receiving a payoff of vi /2. Time
  is valuable: until the first concession each player loses one unit of payoff
  per unit of time.
? Exercise 18.5   Formulate this situation as a strategic game and show
 that in all Nash equilibria one of the players concedes immediately.
 Example 18.6 (A location game) Each of n people chooses whether or
  not to become a political candidate, and if so which position to take.
 2.4 Existence of a Nash Equilibrium                                      19



 There is a continuum of citizens, each of whom has a favorite position;
 the distribution of favorite positions is given by a density function f on
 [0, 1] with f (x) > 0 for all x ∈ [0, 1]. A candidate attracts the votes
 of those citizens whose favorite positions are closer to his position than
 to the position of any other candidate; if k candidates choose the same
 position then each receives the fraction 1/k of the votes that the position
 attracts. The winner of the competition is the candidate who receives
 the most votes. Each person prefers to be the unique winning candidate
 than to tie for first place, prefers to tie for first place than to stay out
 of the competition, and prefers to stay out of the competition than to
 enter and lose.
? Exercise 19.1  Formulate this situation as a strategic game, find the
 set of Nash equilibria when n = 2, and show that there is no Nash
 equilibrium when n = 3.


 2.4   Existence of a Nash Equilibrium

 Not every strategic game has a Nash equilibrium, as the game Matching
 Pennies (Figure 17.3) shows. The conditions under which the set of Nash
 equilibria of a game is nonempty have been investigated extensively. We
 now present an existence result that is one of the simplest of the genre.
 (Nevertheless its mathematical level is more advanced than most of the
 rest of the book, which does not depend on the details.)
   An existence result has two purposes. First, if we have a game that
 satisfies the hypothesis of the result then we know that there is some
 hope that our efforts to find an equilibrium will meet with success. Sec-
 ond, and more important, the existence of an equilibrium shows that
 the game is consistent with a steady state solution. Further, the exis-
 tence of equilibria for a family of games allows us to study properties of
 these equilibria (by using, for example, “comparative static” techniques)
 without finding them explicitly and without taking the risk that we are
 studying the empty set.
   To show that a game has a Nash equilibrium it suffices to show that
 there is a profile a∗ of actions such that a∗i ∈ Bi (a∗−i ) for all i ∈ N
 (see (15.2)). Define the set-valued function B: A → A by B(a) =
 ×i∈N Bi (a−i ). Then (15.2) can be written in vector form simply as
 a∗ ∈ B(a∗ ). Fixed point theorems give conditions on B under which
 there indeed exists a value of a∗ for which a∗ ∈ B(a∗ ). The fixed point
 theorem that we use is the following (due to Kakutani (1941)).
 20                                              Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium



 Lemma 20.1 (Kakutani’s fixed point theorem) Let X be a compact
 convex subset of Rn and let f : X → X be a set-valued function for
 which
   •   for all x ∈ X the set f (x) is nonempty and convex
   •   the graph of f is closed (i.e. for all sequences {xn } and {yn } such
       that yn ∈ f (xn ) for all n, xn → x, and yn → y, we have y ∈ f (x)).
 Then there exists x∗ ∈ X such that x∗ ∈ f (x∗ ).
? Exercise 20.2      Show that each of the following four conditions is nec-
 essary for Kakutani’s theorem. (i ) X is compact. (ii ) X is convex.
 (iii ) f (x) is convex for each x ∈ X. (iv ) f has a closed graph.
   Define a preference relation %i over A to be quasi-concave on Ai if
 for every a∗ ∈ A the set {ai ∈ Ai : (a∗−i , ai ) %i a∗ } is convex.
 Proposition 20.3 The strategic game hN, (Ai ), (%i )i has a Nash equi-
 librium if for all i ∈ N
   •   the set Ai of actions of player i is a nonempty compact convex subset
       of a Euclidian space
 and the preference relation %i is
   •   continuous
   •   quasi-concave on Ai .
 Proof. Define B: A → A by B(a) = ×i∈N Bi (a−i ) (where Bi is the best-
 response function of player i, defined in (15.1)). For every i ∈ N the set
 Bi (a−i ) is nonempty since %i is continuous and Ai is compact, and is
 convex since %i is quasi-concave on Ai ; B has a closed graph since each
 %i is continuous. Thus by Kakutani’s theorem B has a fixed point; as
 we have noted any fixed point is a Nash equilibrium of the game.        2
   Note that this result asserts that a strategic game satisfying certain
 conditions has at least one Nash equilibrium; as we have seen, a game
 can have more than one equilibrium. (Results that we do not discuss
 identify conditions under which a game has a unique Nash equilibrium.)
 Note also that Proposition 20.3 does not apply to any game in which
 some player has finitely many actions, since such a game violates the
 condition that the set of actions of every player be convex.
? Exercise 20.4 (Symmetric games)                Consider a two-person strategic
 game that satisfies the conditions of Proposition 20.3. Let N = {1, 2}
 and assume that the game is symmetric: A1 = A2 and (a1 , a2 ) %1 (b1 , b2 )
 if and only if (a2 , a1 ) %2 (b2 , b1 ) for all a ∈ A and b ∈ A. Use Kakutani’s
  2.5 Strictly Competitive Games                                            21



  theorem to prove that there is an action a∗1 ∈ A1 such that (a∗1 , a∗1 ) is a
  Nash equilibrium of the game. (Such an equilibrium is called a symmet-
  ric equilibrium.) Give an example of a finite symmetric game that has
  only asymmetric equilibria.


  2.5   Strictly Competitive Games

  We can say little about the set of Nash equilibria of an arbitrary strategic
  game; only in limited classes of games can we say something about
  the qualitative character of the equilibria. One such class of games is
  that in which there are two players, whose preferences are diametrically
  opposed. We assume for convenience in this section that the names of
  the players are “1” and “2” (i.e. N = {1, 2}).
I Definition 21.1 A strategic game h{1, 2}, (Ai ), (%i )i is strictly com-
  petitive if for any a ∈ A and b ∈ A we have a %1 b if and only if
  b %2 a.
     A strictly competitive game is sometimes called zerosum because if
  player 1’s preference relation %1 is represented by the payoff function u1
  then player 2’s preference relation is represented by u2 with u1 + u2 = 0.
     We say that player i maxminimizes if he chooses an action that is
  best for him on the assumption that whatever he does, player j will
  choose her action to hurt him as much as possible. We now show that
  for a strictly competitive game that possesses a Nash equilibrium, a
  pair of actions is a Nash equilibrium if and only if the action of each
  player is a maxminimizer. This result is striking because it provides a
  link between individual decision-making and the reasoning behind the
  notion of Nash equilibrium. In establishing the result we also prove
  the strong result that for strictly competitive games that possess Nash
  equilibria all equilibria yield the same payoffs. This property of Nash
  equilibria is rarely satisfied in games that are not strictly competitive.
I Definition 21.2 Let h{1, 2}, (Ai ), (ui )i be a strictly competitive strate-
  gic game. The action x∗ ∈ A1 is a maxminimizer for player 1
  if
              min u1 (x∗ , y) ≥ min u1 (x, y) for all x ∈ A1 .
                 y∈A2              y∈A2
                          ∗
  Similarly, the action y ∈ A2 is a maxminimizer for player 2 if

                 min u2 (x, y ∗ ) ≥ min u2 (x, y) for all y ∈ A2 .
                 x∈A1              x∈A1
22                                              Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium



In words, a maxminimizer for player i is an action that maximizes the
payoff that player i can guarantee. A maxminimizer for player 1 solves
the problem maxx miny u1 (x, y) and a maxminimizer for player 2 solves
the problem maxy minx u2 (x, y).
   In the sequel we assume for convenience that player 1’s preference rela-
tion is represented by a payoff function u1 and, without loss of generality,
that u2 = −u1 . The following result shows that the maxminimization
of player 2’s payoff is equivalent to the minmaximization of player 1’s
payoff.
Lemma 22.1 Let h{1, 2}, (Ai ), (ui )i be a strictly competitive strategic
game. Then maxy∈A2 minx∈A1 u2 (x, y) = − miny∈A2 maxx∈A1 u1 (x, y).
Further, y ∈ A2 solves the problem maxy∈A2 minx∈A1 u2 (x, y) if and
only if it solves the problem miny∈A2 maxx∈A1 u1 (x, y).
Proof. For any function f we have minz (−f (z)) = − maxz f (z) and
arg minz (−f (z)) = arg maxz f (z). It follows that for every y ∈ A2
we have − minx∈A1 u2 (x, y) = maxx∈A1 (−u2 (x, y)) = maxx∈A1 u1 (x, y).
Hence maxy∈A2 minx∈A1 u2 (x, y) = − miny∈A2 [− minx∈A1 u2 (x, y)] =
− miny∈A2 maxx∈A1 u1 (x, y); in addition y ∈ A2 is a solution of the
problem maxy∈A2 minx∈A1 u2 (x, y) if and only if it is a solution of the
problem miny∈A2 maxx∈A1 u1 (x, y).                                    2
   The following result gives the connection between the Nash equilibria
of a strictly competitive game and the set of pairs of maxminimizers.
Proposition 22.2 Let G = h{1, 2}, (Ai ), (ui )i be a strictly competitive
strategic game.
a. If (x∗ , y ∗ ) is a Nash equilibrium of G then x∗ is a maxminimizer
   for player 1 and y ∗ is a maxminimizer for player 2.
b. If (x∗ , y ∗ ) is a Nash equilibrium of G then maxx miny u1 (x, y) =
   miny maxx u1 (x, y) = u1 (x∗ , y ∗ ), and thus all Nash equilibria of G
   yield the same payoffs.
c. If maxx miny u1 (x, y) = miny maxx u1 (x, y) (and thus, in particular,
   if G has a Nash equilibrium (see part b)), x∗ is a maxminimizer for
   player 1, and y ∗ is a maxminimizer for player 2, then (x∗ , y ∗ ) is a
   Nash equilibrium of G.
Proof. We first prove parts (a) and (b). Let (x∗ , y ∗ ) be a Nash equi-
librium of G. Then u2 (x∗ , y ∗ ) ≥ u2 (x∗ , y) for all y ∈ A2 or, since
u2 = −u1 , u1 (x∗ , y ∗ ) ≤ u1 (x∗ , y) for all y ∈ A2 . Hence u1 (x∗ , y ∗ ) =
miny u1 (x∗ , y) ≤ maxx miny u1 (x, y). Similarly, u1 (x∗ , y ∗ ) ≥ u1 (x, y ∗ )
2.5 Strictly Competitive Games                                                23



for all x ∈ A1 and hence u1 (x∗ , y ∗ ) ≥ miny u1 (x, y) for all x ∈ A1 , so that
u1 (x∗ , y ∗ ) ≥ maxx miny u1 (x, y). Thus u1 (x∗ , y ∗ ) = maxx miny u1 (x, y)
and x∗ is a maxminimizer for player 1.
   An analogous argument for player 2 establishes that y ∗ is a max-
minimizer for player 2 and u2 (x∗ , y ∗ ) = maxy minx u2 (x, y), so that
u1 (x∗ , y ∗ ) = miny maxx u1 (x, y).
   To prove part (c) let v ∗ = maxx miny u1 (x, y) = miny maxx u1 (x, y).
By Lemma 22.1 we have maxy minx u2 (x, y) = −v ∗ . Since x∗ is a
maxminimizer for player 1 we have u1 (x∗ , y) ≥ v ∗ for all y ∈ A2 ;
since y ∗ is a maxminimizer for player 2 we have u2 (x, y ∗ ) ≥ −v ∗ for
all x ∈ A1 . Letting y = y ∗ and x = x∗ in these two inequalities we
obtain u1 (x∗ , y ∗ ) = v ∗ and, using the fact that u2 = −u1 , we conclude
that (x∗ , y ∗ ) is a Nash equilibrium of G.                                   2
   Note that by part (c), we may find the players’ Nash equi-
librium strategies by solving the problems maxx miny u1 (x, y) and
maxy minx u2 (x, y). This fact is sometimes useful, especially when the
players randomize (see for example Exercise 36.1).
   Note also that by parts (a) and (c), the Nash equilibria of a strictly
competitive game are interchangeable: if (x, y) and (x0 , y 0 ) are equilibria
then so are (x, y 0 ) and (x0 , y).
   Part (b) shows that maxx miny u1 (x, y) = miny maxx u1 (x, y) for any
strictly competitive game that has a Nash equilibrium. Note that the
inequality maxx miny u1 (x, y) ≤ miny maxx u1 (x, y) holds more gener-
ally: for any x0 we have u1 (x0 , y) ≤ maxx u1 (x, y) for all y, so that
miny u1 (x0 , y) ≤ miny maxx u1 (x, y). (If the maxima and minima are
not well-defined then max and min should be replaced by sup and inf
respectively.) Thus in any game (whether or not it is strictly competi-
tive) the payoff that player 1 can guarantee herself is at most the amount
that player 2 can hold her down to. The hypothesis that the game has a
Nash equilibrium is essential in establishing the opposite inequality. To
see this, consider the game Matching Pennies (Figure 17.3), in which
maxx miny u1 (x, y) = −1 < miny maxx u1 (x, y) = 1.
   If maxx miny u1 (x, y) = miny maxx u1 (x, y) then we say that this pay-
off, the equilibrium payoff of player 1, is the value of the game. It
follows from Proposition 22.2 that if v ∗ is the value of a strictly com-
petitive game then any equilibrium strategy of player 1 guarantees that
her payoff is at least her equilibrium payoff v ∗ , and any equilibrium
strategy of player 2 guarantees that his payoff is at least his equilib-
rium payoff −v ∗ , so that any such strategy of player 2 guarantees that
 24                                              Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium



 player 1’s payoff is at most her equilibrium payoff. In a game that is not
 strictly competitive a player’s equilibrium strategy does not in general
 have these properties (consider, for example, BoS (Figure 16.1)).
? Exercise 24.1    Let G be a strictly competitive game that has a Nash
 equilibrium.
  a. Show that if some of player 1’s payoffs in G are increased in such a
     way that the resulting game G0 is strictly competitive then G0 has
     no equilibrium in which player 1 is worse off than she was in an
     equilibrium of G. (Note that G0 may have no equilibrium at all.)
  b. Show that the game that results if player 1 is prohibited from us-
     ing one of her actions in G does not have an equilibrium in which
     player 1’s payoff is higher than it is in an equilibrium of G.
  c. Give examples to show that neither of the above properties necessar-
     ily holds for a game that is not strictly competitive.

 2.6     Bayesian Games: Strategic Games with Imperfect
         Information

 2.6.1    Definitions
 We frequently wish to model situations in which some of the parties are
 not certain of the characteristics of some of the other parties. The model
 of a Bayesian game, which is closely related to that of a strategic game,
 is designed for this purpose.
    As for a strategic game, two primitives of a Bayesian game are a
 set N of players and a profile (Ai ) of sets of actions. We model the
 players’ uncertainty about each other by introducing a set Ω of possible
 “states of nature”, each of which is a description of all the players’
 relevant characteristics. For convenience we assume that Ω is finite.
 Each player i has a prior belief about the state of nature given by a
 probability measure pi on Ω. In any given play of the game some state
 of nature ω ∈ Ω is realized. We model the players’ information about
 the state of nature by introducing a profile (τi ) of signal functions, τi (ω)
 being the signal that player i observes, before choosing his action, when
 the state of nature is ω. Let Ti be the set of all possible values of τi ; we
 refer to Ti as the set of types of player i. We assume that pi (τi−1 (ti )) > 0
 for all ti ∈ Ti (player i assigns positive prior probability to every member
 of Ti ). If player i receives the signal ti ∈ Ti then he deduces that the state
 is in the set τi−1 (ti ); his posterior belief about the state that has been
  2.6 Bayesian Games: Strategic Games with Imperfect Information             25



  realized assigns to each state ω ∈ Ω the probability pi (ω)/pi (τi−1 (ti )) if
  ω ∈ τi−1 (ti ) and the probability zero otherwise (i.e. the probability of ω
  conditional on τi−1 (ti )). As an example, if τi (ω) = ω for all ω ∈ Ω then
  player i has full information about the state of nature. Alternatively, if
  Ω = ×i∈N Ti and for each player i the probability measure pi is a product
  measure on Ω and τi (ω) = ωi then the players’ signals are independent
  and player i does not learn from his signal anything about the other
  players’ information.
     As in a strategic game, each player cares about the action profile; in
  addition he may care about the state of nature. Now, even if he knows
  the action taken by every other player in every state of nature, a player
  may be uncertain about the pair (a, ω) that will be realized given any
  action that he takes, since he has imperfect information about the state
  of nature. Therefore we include in the model a profile (%i ) of preference
  relations over lotteries on A × Ω (where, as before, A = ×j∈N Aj ). To
  summarize, we make the following definition.
I Definition 25.1 A Bayesian game consists of
   •   a finite set N (the set of players)
   •   a finite set Ω (the set of states)
  and for each player i ∈ N
   •   a set Ai (the set of actions available to player i)
   •   a finite set Ti (the set of signals that may be observed by player i)
       and a function τi : Ω → Ti (the signal function of player i)
   •   a probability measure pi on Ω (the prior belief of player i) for which
       pi (τi−1 (ti )) > 0 for all ti ∈ Ti
   •   a preference relation %i on the set of probability measures over A×Ω
       (the preference relation of player i), where A = ×j∈N Aj .
     Note that this definition allows the players to have different prior
  beliefs. These beliefs may be related; commonly they are identical, co-
  incident with an “objective” measure. Frequently the model is used in
  situations in which a state of nature is a profile of parameters of the
  players’ preferences (for example, profiles of their valuations of an ob-
  ject). However, the model is much more general; in Section 2.6.3 we
  consider its use to capture situations in which each player is uncertain
  about what the others know.
     Note also that sometimes a Bayesian game is described not in terms
  of an underlying state space Ω, but as a “reduced form” in which the
  26                                                     Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium



  basic primitive that relates to the players’ information is the profile of
  the sets of possible types.
     We now turn to a definition of equilibrium for a Bayesian game. In
  any given play of a game each player knows his type and does not need to
  plan what to do in the hypothetical event that he is of some other type.
  Consequently, one might think that an equilibrium should be defined
  for each state of nature in isolation. However, in any given state a
  player who wishes to determine his best action may need to hold a belief
  about what the other players would do in other states, since he may be
  imperfectly informed about the state. Further, the formation of such a
  belief may depend on the action that the player himself would choose in
  other states, since the other players may also be imperfectly informed.
     Thus we are led to define a Nash equilibrium of a Bayesian game hN, Ω,
  (Ai ), (Ti ), (τi ), (pi ), (%i )i to be a Nash equilibrium of the strategic game
  G∗ in which for each i ∈ N and each possible signal ti ∈ Ti there is
  a player, whom we refer to as (i, ti ) (“type ti of player i”). The set of
  actions of each such player (i, ti ) is Ai ; thus the set of action profiles in G∗
  is ×j∈N (×tj ∈Tj Aj ). The preferences of each player (i, ti ) are defined as
  follows. The posterior belief of player i, together with an action profile a∗
  in G∗ , generates a lottery Li (a∗ , ti ) over A × Ω: the probability assigned
  by Li (a∗ , ti ) to ((a∗ (j, τj (ω)))j∈N , ω) is player i’s posterior belief that the
  state is ω when he receives the signal ti (a∗ (j, τj (ω)) being the action
  of player (j, τj (ω)) in the profile a∗ ). Player (i, ti ) in G∗ prefers the
  action profile a∗ to the action profile b∗ if and only if player i in the
  Bayesian game prefers the lottery Li (a∗ , ti ) to the lottery Li (b∗ , ti ). To
  summarize, we have the following.
I Definition 26.1 A Nash equilibrium of a Bayesian game hN,
  Ω, (Ai ), (Ti ), (τi ), (pi ), (%i )i is a Nash equilibrium of the strategic game
  defined as follows.
    •   The set of players is the set of all pairs (i, ti ) for i ∈ N and ti ∈ Ti .
    •   The set of actions of each player (i, ti ) is Ai .
    •   The preference ordering %∗(i,ti ) of each player (i, ti ) is defined by
                   a∗ %∗(i,ti ) b∗ if and only if Li (a∗ , ti ) %i Li (b∗ , ti ),
        where Li (a∗ , ti ) is the lottery over A × Ω that assigns probabil-
        ity pi (ω)/pi (τi−1 (ti )) to ((a∗ (j, τj (ω)))j∈N , ω) if ω ∈ τi−1 (ti ), zero
        otherwise.
    In brief, in a Nash equilibrium of a Bayesian game each player chooses
  the best action available to him given the signal that he receives and his
 2.6 Bayesian Games: Strategic Games with Imperfect Information                       27



 belief about the state and the other players’ actions that he deduces from
 this signal. Note that to determine whether an action profile is a Nash
 equilibrium of a Bayesian game we need to know only how each player
 in the Bayesian game compares lotteries over A × Ω in which the distri-
 bution over Ω is the same: a player never needs to compare lotteries in
 which this distribution is different. Thus from the point of view of Nash
 equilibrium the specification of the players’ preferences in a Bayesian
 game contains more information than is necessary. (This redundancy
 has an analog in a strategic game: to define a Nash equilibrium of a
 strategic game we need to know only how any player i compares any
 outcome (a−i , ai ) with any other outcome (a−i , bi ).)

 2.6.2     Examples
 Example 27.1 (Second-price auction) Consider a variant of the second-
  price sealed-bid auction described in Example 18.1 in which each player i
  knows his own valuation vi but is uncertain of the other players’ valu-
  ations. Specifically, suppose that the set of possible valuations is the
  finite set V and each player believes that every other player’s valua-
  tion is drawn independently from the same distribution over V . We can
  model this situation as the Bayesian game in which
   •   the set N of players is {1, . . . , n}
   •   the set Ω of states is V n (the set of profiles of valuations)
   •   the set Ai of actions of each player i is R+
   •   the set Ti of signals that i can receive is V
   •   the signal function τi of i is defined by τi (v1 , . . . , vn ) = vi
   •   the prior belief pi of i is given by pi (v1 , . . . , vn ) = Πnj=1 π(vj ) for some
       probability distribution π over V
   •   player i’s preference relation is represented by the expectation of the
       random variable whose value in state (v1 , . . . , vn ) is vi −maxj∈N \{i} aj
       if i is the player with the lowest index for whom ai ≥ aj for all j ∈ N ,
       and 0 otherwise.
   This game has a Nash equilibrium a∗ in which a∗ (i, vi ) = vi for all
 i ∈ N and vi ∈ V = Ti (each player bids his valuation). In fact (as
 in Exercise 18.3) it is a weakly dominant action for each type of each
 player to bid his valuation.
? Exercise 27.2   Two players wish to go out together to a concert of
 music by either Bach or Stravinsky. As in BoS their main concern is
  28                                            Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium



  to go out together; but neither player knows whether the other prefers
  Bach to Stravinsky, or the reverse. Each player’s preferences are rep-
  resented by the expectation of his payoff, the payoffs to pure outcomes
  being analogous to those given in Figure 16.1. Model this situation as
  a Bayesian game and find the Nash equilibria for all possible beliefs.
  Show in particular that there are equilibria in which there is a positive
  probability that the players do not go to the same concert.
? Exercise 28.1 (An exchange game) Each of two players receives a ticket
  on which there is a number in some finite subset S of the interval [0, 1].
  The number on a player’s ticket is the size of a prize that he may re-
  ceive. The two prizes are identically and independently distributed, with
  distribution function F . Each player is asked independently and simul-
  taneously whether he wants to exchange his prize for the other player’s
  prize. If both players agree then the prizes are exchanged; otherwise
  each player receives his own prize. Each player’s objective is to maxi-
  mize his expected payoff. Model this situation as a Bayesian game and
  show that in any Nash equilibrium the highest prize that either player
  is willing to exchange is the smallest possible prize.
? Exercise 28.2      Show that more information may hurt a player by
  constructing a two-player Bayesian game with the following features.
  Player 1 is fully informed while player 2 is not; the game has a unique
  Nash equilibrium, in which player 2’s payoff is higher than his payoff in
  the unique equilibrium of any of the related games in which he knows
  player 1’s type.

  2.6.3   Comments on the Model of a Bayesian Game
  The idea that a situation in which the players are unsure about each
  other’s characteristics can be modeled as a Bayesian game, in which the
  players’ uncertainty is captured by a probability measure over some set
  of “states”, is due to Harsanyi (1967/68). Harsanyi assumes that the
  prior belief of every player is the same, arguing that all differences in the
  players’ knowledge should be derived from an objective mechanism that
  assigns information to each player, not from differences in the players’
  initial beliefs. In Section 5.3 we show that the assumption of a common
  prior belief has strong implications for the relationship between the play-
  ers’ posterior beliefs. (For example, after a pair of players receive their
  signals it cannot be “common knowledge” between them that player 1
  believes the probability that the state of nature is in some given set to
Notes                                                                            29



be α and that player 2 believes this probability to be β 6= α, though it is
possible that player 1 believes the probability to be α, player 2 believes
it to be β, and one of them is unsure about the other’s belief.)
   A Bayesian game can be used to model not only situations in which
each player is uncertain about the other players’ payoffs, as in Exam-
ple 27.1, but also situations in which each player is uncertain about the
other players’ knowledge.
   Consider, for example, a Bayesian game in which the set of players
is N = {1, 2}, the set of states is Ω = {ω1 , ω2 , ω3 }, the prior belief
of each player assigns probability 31 to each state, the signal functions
are defined by τ1 (ω1 ) = τ1 (ω2 ) = t01 , τ1 (ω3 ) = t001 , and τ2 (ω1 ) = t02 ,
τ2 (ω2 ) = τ2 (ω3 ) = t002 , and player 1’s preferences satisfy (b, ωj ) 1 (c, ωj )
for j = 1, 2 and (c, ω3 ) 1 (b, ω3 ) for some action profiles b and c, while
player 2 is indifferent between all pairs (a, ω). In state ω1 in such a game
player 2 knows that player 1 prefers b to c, while in state ω2 he does not
know whether player 1 prefers b to c or c to b. Since in state ω1 player 1
does not know whether the state is ω1 or ω2 , she does not know in this
case whether (i ) player 2 knows that she prefers b to c, or (ii ) player 2
is not sure whether she prefers b to c or c to b.
   Can every situation in which the players are uncertain about each
other’s knowledge be modeled as a Bayesian game? Assume that the
players’ payoffs depend only on a parameter θ ∈ Θ. Denote the set of
possible beliefs of each player i by Xi . Then a belief of any player j is a
probability distribution over Θ × X−j . That is, the set of beliefs of any
player has to be defined in terms of the sets of beliefs of all the other
players. Thus the answer to the question we posed is not trivial and is
equivalent to the question of whether we can find a collection {Xj }j∈N
of sets with the property that for all i ∈ N the set Xi is isomorphic
to the set of probability distributions over Θ × X−i . If so, we can let
Ω = Θ × (×i∈N Xi ) be the state space and use the model of a Bayesian
game to capture any situation in which players are uncertain not only
about each other’s payoffs but also about each other’s beliefs. A positive
answer is given to the question by Mertens and Zamir (1985); we omit
the argument.

Notes

The notion of an abstract strategic game has its origins in the work of
Borel (1921) and von Neumann (1928). The notion of Nash equilibrium
was formalized in the context of such a game by Nash (1950a); the
30                                         Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium



basic idea behind it goes back at least to Cournot (1838). The idea
of the proof of Proposition 20.3 originated with Nash (1950a, 1951)
and Glicksberg (1952), though the results they prove are slightly dif-
ferent. As stated the result is similar to Theorem 3.1 of Nikaidô and
Isoda (1955). The result in Exercise 20.4 is due to Nash (1951). The
idea of maxminimization dates back at least to the early eighteenth cen-
tury (see Kuhn (1968)). The main ideas of Proposition 22.2 are due
to von Neumann (1928); the theory of strictly competitive games was
developed by von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944). Bayesian games
were defined and studied by Harsanyi (1967/68).
   The Prisoner’s Dilemma appears to have first entered the literature
in unpublished papers by Raiffa (in 1951) and Flood (in 1952, report-
ing joint work with Dresher); the standard interpretation of the game
is due to Tucker (see Raiffa (1992, p. 173)). BoS is due to Luce and
Raiffa (1957). Hawk–Dove is known also as “Chicken”. Auctions (Ex-
amples 18.1 and 27.1) were first studied formally by Vickrey (1961). The
war of attrition in Example 18.4 is due to Maynard Smith (1974), the
location game in Example 18.6 is due to Hotelling (1929), and the game
in Exercise 28.1 is due to Brams, Kilgour, and Davis (1993).
3          Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary
           Equilibrium




In this chapter we examine two concepts of equilibrium in which the
players’ actions are not deterministic: mixed strategy Nash equilib-
rium and correlated equilibrium. We also briefly study a variant of
Nash equilibrium designed to model the outcome of an evolutionary
process.

3.1     Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium

3.1.1   Definitions
The notion of mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is designed to model a
steady state of a game in which the participants’ choices are not deter-
ministic but are regulated by probabilistic rules. We begin with formal
definitions, then turn to their interpretation.
   In the previous chapter we define a strategic game to be a triple hN,
(Ai ), (%i )i, where the preference relation %i of each player i is defined
over the set A = ×i∈N Ai of action profiles (Definition 11.1). In this
chapter we allow the players’ choices to be nondeterministic and thus
need to add to the primitives of the model a specification of each player’s
preference relation over lotteries on A. Following the current convention
in game theory, we assume that the preference relation of each player i
satisfies the assumptions of von Neumann and Morgenstern, so that
it can be represented by the expected value of some function ui : A →
R. Thus our basic model of strategic interaction in this chapter is a
triple hN, (Ai ), (ui )i that differs from a strategic game as we previously
defined it in that ui : A → R for each i ∈ N is a function whose expected
value represents player i’s preferences over the set of lotteries on A.
Nevertheless, we refer to the model simply as a strategic game.
  32             Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium



     Let G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i be such a strategic game. We denote by
  ∆(Ai ) the set of probability distributions over Ai and refer to a member
  of ∆(Ai ) as a mixed strategy of player i; we assume that the players’
  mixed strategies are independent randomizations. For clarity, we some-
  times refer to a member of Ai as a pure strategy. For any finite set
  X and δ ∈ ∆(X) we denote by δ(x) the probability that δ assigns to
  x ∈ X and define the support of δ to be the set of elements x ∈ X for
  which δ(x) > 0. A profile (αj )j∈N of mixed strategies induces a proba-
  bility distribution over the set A; if, for example, each Aj is finite then
  given the independence of the randomizations the probability of the ac-
  tion profile a = (aj )j∈N is Πj∈N αj (aj ), so that player i’s evaluation of
               P
  (αj )j∈N is a∈A (Πj∈N αj (aj )) ui (a).
     We now derive from G another strategic game, called the “mixed
  extension” of G, in which the set of actions of each player i is the set
  ∆(Ai ) of his mixed strategies in G.
I Definition 32.1 The mixed extension of the strategic game hN, (Ai ),
  (ui )i is the strategic game hN, (∆(Ai )), (Ui )i in which ∆(Ai ) is the set
  of probability distributions over Ai , and Ui : ×j∈N ∆(Aj ) → R assigns to
  each α ∈ ×j∈N ∆(Aj ) the expected value under ui of the lottery over A
                                           P
  that is induced by α (so that Ui (α) = a∈A (Πj∈N αj (aj )) ui (a) if A is
  finite).
     Note that each function Ui is multilinear. That is, for any mixed
  strategy profile α, any mixed strategies βi and γi of player i, and any
  number λ ∈ [0, 1], we have Ui (α−i , λβi + (1 − λ)γi ) = λUi (α−i , βi ) +
  (1 − λ)Ui (α−i , γi ). Note also that when each Ai is finite we have
                                 X
                        Ui (α) =      αi (ai )Ui (α−i , e(ai ))        (32.2)
                               ai ∈Ai

  for any mixed strategy profile α, where e(ai ) is the degenerate mixed
  strategy of player i that attaches probability one to ai ∈ Ai .
     We now define the main equilibrium notion we study in this chapter.
I Definition 32.3 A mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of a strate-
  gic game is a Nash equilibrium of its mixed extension.
      Suppose that α∗ ∈ ×j∈N ∆(Aj ) is a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
  of G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i in which each player i’s mixed strategy αi∗ is degen-
  erate in the sense that it assigns probability one to a single member—say
  a∗i —of Ai . Then, since Ai can be identified with a subset of ∆(Ai ), the
  action profile a∗ is a Nash equilibrium of G. Conversely, suppose that
  a∗ is a Nash equilibrium of G. Then by the linearity of Ui in αi no
3.1 Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium                                     33



probability distribution over actions in Ai yields player i a payoff higher
than that generated by e(a∗i ), and thus the profile (e(a∗i )) is a mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium of G.
   We have just argued that the set of Nash equilibria of a strategic game
is a subset of its set of mixed strategy Nash equilibria. In Chapter 2 we
saw that there are games for which the set of Nash equilibria is empty.
There are also games for which the set of mixed strategy Nash equilibria
is empty. However, every game in which each player has finitely many
actions has at least one mixed strategy Nash equilibrium, as the following
result shows.
Proposition 33.1 Every finite strategic game has a mixed strategy
Nash equilibrium.
Proof. Let G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i be a strategic game, and for each player i
let mi be the number of members of the set Ai . Then we can iden-
tify the set ∆(Ai ) of player i’s mixed strategies with the set of vectors
                                                  Pmi
(p1 , . . . , pmi ) for which pk ≥ 0 for all k and k=1 pk = 1 (pk being the
probability with which player i uses his kth pure strategy). This set is
nonempty, convex, and compact. Since expected payoff is linear in the
probabilities, each player’s payoff function in the mixed extension of G is
both quasi-concave in his own strategy and continuous. Thus the mixed
extension of G satisfies all the requirements of Proposition 20.3.       2
   Essential to this proof is the assumption that the set of actions of
each player is finite. Glicksberg (1952) shows that a game in which each
action set is a convex compact subset of a Euclidian space and each
payoff function is continuous has a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium.
(If each player’s payoff function is also quasi-concave in his own action
then Proposition 20.3 shows that such a game has a pure strategy Nash
equilibrium.)
   The following result gives an important property of mixed strategy
Nash equilibria that is useful when calculating equilibria.
Lemma 33.2 Let G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i be a finite strategic game. Then
α∗ ∈ ×i∈N ∆(Ai ) is a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of G if and only
if for every player i ∈ N every pure strategy in the support of αi∗ is a
                   ∗
best response to α−i .
Proof. First suppose that there is an action ai in the support of αi∗ that
                            ∗
is not a best response to α−i . Then by linearity of Ui in αi (see (32.2))
player i can increase his payoff by transferring probability from ai to an
action that is a best response; hence αi∗ is not a best response to α−i
                                                                      ∗
                                                                         .
 34             Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium



    Second suppose that there is a mixed strategy αi0 that gives a higher
 expected payoff than does αi∗ in response to α−i   ∗
                                                       . Then again by the
 linearity of Ui at least one action in the support of αi0 must give a higher
 payoff than some action in the support of αi∗ , so that not all actions in
 the support of αi∗ are best responses to α−i ∗
                                                .                          2
    It follows that every action in the support of any player’s equilibrium
 mixed strategy yields that player the same payoff.
    If the set of actions of some player is not finite the result needs to be
 modified. In this case, α∗ is a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of G
                                                                        ∗
 if and only if (i ) for every player i no action in Ai yields, given α−i  ,a
 payoff to player i that exceeds his equilibrium payoff, and (ii ) the set of
                               ∗
 actions that yield, given α−i   , a payoff less than his equilibrium payoff
        ∗
 has αi -measure zero.
    Note that the assumption that the players’ preferences can be repre-
 sented by expected payoff functions plays a key role in these character-
 izations of mixed strategy equilibrium. The results do not necessarily
 hold for other theories of decision-making under uncertainty.

 3.1.2   Examples
 The following example illustrates how one can find mixed strategy Nash
 equilibria of finite games.
 Example 34.1 (BoS ) Consider the game BoS, reproduced in the top of
  Figure 35.1. In Chapter 2 we interpreted the payoffs of player i in this ta-
  ble as representing player i’s preferences over the set of (pure) outcomes.
  Here, given our interest in mixed strategy equilibria, we interpret the
  payoffs as von Neumann–Morgenstern utilities.
    As we noted previously this game has two (pure) Nash equilibria,
  (B, B) and (S, S), where B = Bach and S = Stravinsky. Suppose that
  (α1 , α2 ) is a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium. If α1 (B) is zero or one,
  we obtain the two pure Nash equilibria. If 0 < α1 (B) < 1 then, given α2 ,
  by Lemma 33.2 player 1’s actions B and S must yield the same payoff,
  so that we must have 2α2 (B) = α2 (S) and thus α2 (B) = 31 . Since 0 <
  α2 (B) < 1 it follows from the same result that player 2’s actions B and
  S must yield the same payoff, so that α1 (B) = 2α1 (S), or α1 (B) = 32 .
  Thus the only nondegenerate mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of the
  game is (( 23 , 13 ), ( 13 , 23 )).
    It is illuminating to construct the players’ best response functions in
  the mixed extension of this game. If 0 ≤ α2 (B) < 31 then player 1’s
  3.1 Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium                                              35



                                        Bach        Stravinsky

                           Bach          2, 1              0, 0

                     Stravinsky          0, 0              1, 2

                                                                  s
                           ↑ 1
                        α2 (B)


                                                        B2


                              1                      s
                              3
                                         B1

                                  s
                              0                     2             1
                                                    3
                                                         α1 (B) →

  Figure 35.1 The strategic game BoS (top) and the players’ best response functions
  in the mixed extension of this game (bottom). The best response function of player 1
  is given by the dashed line; that of player 2 is given by the solid line. The small
  disks indicate the two pure strategy Nash equilibria and the mixed strategy Nash
  equilibrium.


  unique best response α1 has α1 (B) = 0; if 31 < α2 (B) ≤ 1 then her
  unique best response has α1 (B) = 1; and if α2 = 13 then, as we saw
  above, all of her mixed strategies are best responses. Making a similar
  computation for player 2 we obtain the functions shown at the bottom
  of Figure 35.1.

? Exercise 35.1 (Guess the average) Each of n people announces a num-
  ber in the set {1, . . . , K}. A prize of $1 is split equally between all the
  people whose number is closest to 23 of the average number. Show that
  the game has a unique mixed strategy Nash equilibrium, in which each
  player’s strategy is pure.
? Exercise 35.2 (An investment race)       Two investors are involved in a
  competition with a prize of $1. Each investor can spend any amount in
  the interval [0, 1]. The winner is the investor who spends the most; in
  the event of a tie each investor receives $0.50. Formulate this situation
  as a strategic game and find its mixed strategy Nash equilibria. (Note
  36             Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium



  that the players’ payoff functions are discontinuous, so that Glicksberg’s
  result does not apply; nevertheless the game has a mixed strategy Nash
  equilibrium.)
     In Section 2.5 we define and study the class of strictly competitive
  games. We show (Proposition 22.2) that in any strictly competitive
  strategic game that has a Nash equilibrium the set of equilibria coin-
  cides with the set of pairs of maxminimizers. This fact can be used to
  find the set of mixed strategy Nash equilibria of games whose mixed
  extensions are strictly competitive. (Note that the fact that a game is
  strictly competitive does not imply that its mixed extension is strictly
  competitive. To see this, consider a game in which there are three pos-
  sible outcomes a1 , a2 , and a3 . Then we may have a1 1 a2 1 a3 and
  a3 2 a2 2 a1 , so that the game is strictly competitive, while both
  players may prefer a2 to the lottery in which a1 and a3 occur with equal
  probabilities, so that its mixed extension is not strictly competitive.)
? Exercise 36.1 (Guessing right)        Players 1 and 2 each choose a mem-
  ber of the set {1, . . . , K}. If the players choose the same number then
  player 2 pays $1 to player 1; otherwise no payment is made. Each player
  maximizes his expected monetary payoff. Find the mixed strategy Nash
  equilibria of this (strictly competitive) game.
? Exercise 36.2 (Air strike) Army A has a single plane with which it can
  strike one of three possible targets. Army B has one anti-aircraft gun
  that can be assigned to one of the targets. The value of target k is vk ,
  with v1 > v2 > v3 > 0. Army A can destroy a target only if the target is
  undefended and A attacks it. Army A wishes to maximize the expected
  value of the damage and army B wishes to minimize it. Formulate the
  situation as a (strictly competitive) strategic game and find its mixed
  strategy Nash equilibria.
? Exercise 36.3     Show the following mathematical result, which we use in
  Exercise 64.2. For any two compact convex subsets X and Y of Rk there
  exist x∗ ∈ X and y ∗ ∈ Y such that x∗ ·y ≤ x∗ ·y ∗ ≤ x·y ∗ for all x ∈ X and
  y ∈ Y . (You can prove this result either by appealing to the existence of
  a Nash equilibrium in a strategic game (Proposition 20.3), or by the fol-
  lowing elementary argument (which avoids the implicit use of Kakutani’s
  fixed point theorem). Let (xk ) and (y k ) be sequences dense in X and
  Y respectively, and for each positive integer n consider the strictly com-
  petitive game in which each player has n actions and the payoff function
  of player 1 is given by u1 (i, j) = xi · y j ; use Propositions 33.1 and 22.2.)
3.2 Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium                  37



3.2     Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium

In this section we discuss a number of interpretations of mixed strategy
equilibrium. We disagree on some points; paragraphs that express the
views of only one of us are preceded by that author’s initials.

3.2.1    Mixed Strategies as Objects of Choice
Viewed naı̈vely, a mixed strategy entails a deliberate decision by a player
to introduce randomness into his behavior: a player who chooses a mixed
strategy commits himself to a random device that probabilistically se-
lects members of his set of actions. After all the players have so commit-
ted themselves, the devices are operated and an action profile is realized.
Thus each player i chooses a member of ∆(Ai ) in the same way that he
chooses a member of Ai in the strategic games discussed in Chapter 2.
   There certainly are cases in which players introduce randomness into
their behavior. For example, players randomly “bluff” in poker, gov-
ernments randomly audit taxpayers, and some stores randomly offer
discounts.
   ar However, the notion of a mixed strategy equilibrium in a strategic
game does not capture the players’ motivation to introduce randomness
into their behavior. Usually a player deliberately randomizes in order
to influence the other players’ behavior. Consider, for example, the chil-
dren’s version of Matching Pennies (Example 17.1) in which the players
choose to display an odd or even number of fingers. This game is clas-
sically used to motivate the notion of mixed strategy equilibrium, but
randomization is a bizarre description of a player’s deliberate strategy
in the game. A player’s action is a response to his guess about the other
player’s choice; guessing is a psychological operation that is very much
deliberate and not random. Alternatively, consider another example of-
ten given to motivate mixed strategy equilibrium, namely the relation-
ship between the tax authorities and a taxpayer. The authorities’ aim is
to deter the taxpayer from tax evasion; considerations of cost lead them
to audit only randomly. They would like the taxpayer to know their
strategy and are not indifferent between a strategy in which they audit
the taxpayer and one in which they do not do so, as required in a mixed
strategy equilibrium. The situation should be modeled as a game in
which the authorities first choose the probability of auditing, and then,
being informed of this probability, the taxpayer takes an action. In such
a model the set of possible randomizations is the set of pure strategies.
38            Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium



   mjo The main problem with interpreting a player’s equilibrium mixed
strategy as a deliberate choice is the fact that in a mixed strategy equi-
librium each player is indifferent between all mixed strategies whose sup-
ports are subsets of her equilibrium strategy: her equilibrium strategy
is only one of many strategies that yield her the same expected pay-
off, given the other players’ equilibrium behavior. However, this prob-
lem is not limited to mixed strategy equilibria. For example, it afflicts
equilibria in many sequential games (including all repeated games), in
which a player is indifferent between her equilibrium strategy and many
non-equilibrium strategies. Further, in some games there may be other
reasons to choose an equilibrium mixed strategy. In strictly competitive
games, for example, we have seen that an equilibrium mixed strategy
may strictly maximize the payoff that a player can guarantee. (This is
so, for example, in Matching Pennies.) Finally, the ingenious argument
of Harsanyi (1973) (considered below in Section 3.2.4) provides some
relief from this feature of an equilibrium mixed strategy.
   mjo It seems likely that the mixed strategy equilibrium of Match-
ing Pennies provides a good description of the steady state behavior of
players who play the game repeatedly against randomly selected oppo-
nents. In such a situation a player has no way of guessing the action of
her opponent in any particular encounter, and it is reasonable for her
to adopt the strategy that maximizes the payoff that she can guaran-
tee. If two players interact repeatedly then the psychology of guessing
may offer insights into their behavior, though even in this case the mixed
strategy equilibrium of the game may provide a good description of their
behavior. The tax auditing situation can equally well be modeled as a
strategic game in which the choices of the players are simultaneous. The
equilibrium audit probability chosen by the authorities is the same in
this game as it is in the game in which the authorities move first; given
the behavior of the taxpayer, the authorities are indifferent between
auditing and not.

3.2.2   Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium as a Steady State
In Chapter 2 we interpreted a Nash equilibrium as a steady state of an
environment in which players act repeatedly and ignore any strategic
link that may exist between plays. We can interpret a mixed strategy
Nash equilibrium similarly as a stochastic steady state. The players
have information about the frequencies with which actions were taken
in the past (“80% of the time a player in the role of player 1 in this game
3.2 Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium                  39



took the action a1 and 20% of the time such a player took the action
b1 ”); each player uses these frequencies to form his belief about the
future behavior of the other players, and hence formulate his action. In
equilibrium these frequencies remain constant over time and are stable
in the sense that any action taken with positive probability by a player
is optimal given the steady state beliefs.
   A mixed strategy equilibrium predicts that the outcome of a game
is stochastic, so that for a single play of a game its prediction is less
precise than that of a pure strategy equilibrium. But as we argued in
Section 1.5, the role of the theory is to explain regularities; the notion
of mixed strategy equilibrium captures stochastic regularity.
   A variant of this interpretation is based on an interpretation of an n-
player game as a model of the interaction of n large populations. Each
occurrence of the game takes place after n players are randomly drawn,
one from each population. The probabilities in player i’s equilibrium
mixed strategy are interpreted as the steady state frequencies with which
the members of Ai are used in the ith population. In this interpretation
the game is a reduced form of a model in which the populations are
described explicitly.
   An assumption that underlies the steady state interpretation is that
no player detects any correlation among the other players’ actions or
between the other players’ actions and his own behavior. Removing
this assumption leads to the notion of correlated equilibrium, which we
discuss in Section 3.3.

3.2.3   Mixed Strategies as Pure Strategies in an Extended Game
Before selecting his action a player may receive random private infor-
mation, inconsequential from the point of view of the other players, on
which his action may depend. The player may not consciously choose
the connection between his action and the realization of his private infor-
mation; it may just happen that there is a correlation between the two
that causes his action to appear to be “random” from the point of view
of another player or outside observer. In modeling a player’s behavior as
random, a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium captures the dependence of
behavior on factors that the players perceive as irrelevant. Alternatively,
a player may be aware that external factors determine his opponents’
behavior, but may find it impossible or very costly to determine the
relationship. (For the same reason we model the outcome of a coin toss
as random rather than describe it as the result of the interaction of its
40             Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium



starting position and velocity, the wind speed, and other factors.) To
summarize, a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium, viewed in this way, is a
description of a steady state of the system that reflects elements missing
from the original description of the game.
   To be more concrete, consider the game BoS (Example 34.1). As we
saw, this game has a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium (( 32 , 13 ), ( 13 , 23 )).
Now suppose that each player has three possible “moods”, determined
by factors he does not understand. Each player is in each of these
moods one-third of the time, independently of the other player’s mood;
his mood has no effect on his payoff. Assume that player 1 chooses Bach
whenever she is in moods 1 or 2 and Stravinsky when she is in mood 3,
and player 2 chooses Bach when he is in mood 1 and Stravinsky when he
is in moods 2 or 3. Viewing the situation as a Bayesian game in which the
three types of each player correspond to his possible moods, this behavior
defines a pure strategy equilibrium corresponding exactly to the mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium of the original game BoS. Note that this
interpretation of the mixed strategy equilibrium does not depend on each
player’s having three equally likely and independent moods; we need the
players’ private information only to be rich enough that they can create
the appropriate random variables. Nevertheless, the requirement that
such an informational structure exist limits the interpretation.
   ar There are three criticisms of this interpretation. First, it is hard
to accept that the deliberate behavior of a player depends on factors
that have no effect on his payoff. People usually give reasons for their
choices; in any particular situation a modeler who wishes to apply the
notion of mixed strategy equilibrium should point out the reasons that
are payoff irrelevant and explain the required dependency between the
player’s private information and his choice.
   mjo In a mixed strategy equilibrium each player is indifferent between
all the actions in the support of her equilibrium strategy, so that it is
not implausible that the action chosen depends upon factors regarded
by the modeler as “irrelevant”. When asked why they chose a certain
action from a set whose members are equally attractive, people often
give answers like “I don’t know—I just felt like it”.
   ar Second, the behavior predicted by an equilibrium under this in-
terpretation is very fragile. If a manager’s behavior is determined by
the type of breakfast he eats, then factors outside the model, such as a
change in his diet or the price of eggs, may change the frequency with
which he chooses his actions, thus inducing changes in the beliefs of the
other players and causing instability.
3.2 Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium                  41



   mjo For each structure of the random events there is a pattern of
behavior that leads to the same equilibrium. For example, if, before
an increase in the price of eggs, there was an equilibrium in which a
manager offered a discount on days when she ate eggs for breakfast and
got up before 7:30 a.m., then after the price increase there may be an
equilibrium in which she offers the discount when she eats eggs and gets
up before 8 a.m. After the price change her old pattern of behavior is
no longer a best response to the other players’ strategies; whether or not
the system will adjust in a stable way to the new equilibrium depends on
the process of adjustment. A mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is fragile
in the sense that the players have no positive incentive to adhere to their
equilibrium patterns of behavior (since the equilibrium strategies are not
uniquely optimal); beyond this, an equilibrium under this interpretation
is no more fragile than under any other interpretation. (And, once again,
this is a problem that is addressed by Harsanyi’s model, discussed in the
next section.)
   ar Third, in order to interpret an equilibrium of a particular problem
in this way one needs to indicate the “real life” exogenous variables on
which the players base their behavior. For example, to interpret a mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium in a model of price competition one should
both specify the unmodeled factors that serve as the basis for the firms’
pricing policies and show that the information structure is rich enough
to span the set of all mixed strategy Nash equilibria. Those who apply
the notion of mixed strategy equilibrium rarely do so.
   mjo A player in the world has access to a multitude of random vari-
ables on which her actions may depend: the time she wakes up in the
morning, the “mood” she is in, the time her newspaper is delivered, . . . .
The structure of these random variables is so rich that it is unnecessary
to spell them out in every application of the theory. To interpret mixed
strategies as pure strategies in a larger game nicely captures the idea
that the action chosen by a player may depend on factors outside the
model.

3.2.4   Mixed Strategies as Pure Strategies in a Perturbed Game
We now present a rationale for mixed strategy equilibrium due to Har-
sanyi (1973). A game is viewed as a frequently occurring situation in
which the players’ preferences are subject to small random variations.
(Thus, as in the argument of the previous section, random factors are
introduced, but here they are payoff-relevant.) In each occurrence of
 42              Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium



 the situation each player knows his own preferences but not those of
 the other players. A mixed strategy equilibrium is a summary of the
 frequencies with which the players choose their actions over time.
    Let G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i be a finite strategic game and let  =
 (i (a))i∈N,a∈A be a collection of random variables with range [−1, 1],
 where i = (i (a))a∈A has a continuously differentiable density function
 and an absolutely continuous distribution function, and the random vec-
 tors (i )i∈N are independent. Consider a family of perturbed games in
 which each player i’s payoff at the outcome a is subject to the small
 random variation i (a), each player i knowing the realization (i (a))a∈A
 of i but not the realizations of the other players’ random variables.
 That is, consider the Bayesian game G() in which the set of states of
 nature is the set of all possible values of the realizations of , the (com-
 mon) prior belief of each player is the probability distribution specified
 by , the signal function of player i informs him only of the realizations
 (i (a))a∈A , and the payoff of player i at the outcome a and state  is
 ui (a) + i (a). (Note that each player has infinitely many types.)
    Harsanyi’s main result (1973, Theorems 2 and 7) is that for almost
 any game G and any collection ∗ of random variables satisfying the
 conditions above, almost any mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of G is
 the mixed strategy profile associated with the limit, as the size γ of the
 perturbation vanishes, of a sequence of pure strategy equilibria of the
 Bayesian games G(γ∗ ) in each of which the action chosen by each type
 is strictly optimal. Further, the limit of any such convergent sequence
 is associated with a mixed strategy equilibrium of G (Harsanyi (1973,
 Theorem 5)). That is, when the random variations in payoffs are small,
 almost any mixed equilibrium of the game G is close to a pure equi-
 librium of the associated Bayesian game and vice versa. We say that
 a mixed strategy equilibrium of G with this property is approachable
 under ∗ . (Because of the relative mathematical complexity of these
 results we do not include proofs.)
? Exercise 42.1        Consider two-player games in which each player i has
 two pure strategies, ai and bi . Let δ i for i = 1, 2 be independent
 random variables, each uniformly distributed on [−1, 1], and let the ran-
 dom variables i (a) for i = 1, 2 and a ∈ A have the property that
 1 (a1 , x) − 1 (b1 , x) = δ 1 for x = a2 , b2 and 2 (x, a2 ) − 2 (x, b2 ) = δ 2
 for x = a1 , b1 .
  a. Show that all the equilibria of BoS (Example 15.3) are approachable
     under .
3.2 Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium                     43



 b. For the game in which ui (a1 , a2 ) = 1 for i = 1, 2 and all other payoffs
    are zero, show that only the pure strategy Nash equilibrium (a1 , a2 )
    is approachable under .
 c. For the game in which ui (a) = 0 for i = 1, 2 and all a ∈ A, show
    that only the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium α in which αi (ai ) =
    αi (bi ) = 21 for i = 1, 2 is approachable under . (Other equilibria
    are approachable under other perturbations.)
   Thus Harsanyi’s rationale for a mixed strategy equilibrium is that
even if no player makes any effort to use his pure strategies with the
required probabilities, the random variations in the payoff functions in-
duce each player to choose his pure strategies with the right frequencies.
The equilibrium behavior of the other players is such that a player who
chooses the uniquely optimal pure strategy for each realization of his
payoff function chooses his actions with the frequencies required by his
equilibrium mixed strategy.
   mjo Harsanyi’s result is an elegant response to the claim that a player
has no reason to choose her equilibrium mixed strategy since she is in-
different between all strategies with the same support. I argued above
that for some games, including strictly competitive games, this criticism
is muted, since there are other reasons for players to choose their equi-
librium mixed strategies. Harsanyi’s result shows that in almost any
game the force of the criticism is limited, since almost any mixed strat-
egy Nash equilibrium is close to a strict pure strategy equilibrium of
any perturbation of the game in which the players’ payoffs are subject
to small random variations.

3.2.5   Mixed Strategies as Beliefs
Under another interpretation, upon which we elaborate in Section 5.4,
a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is a profile β of beliefs, in which βi
is the common belief of all the other players about player i’s actions,
with the property that for each player i each action in the support of
βi is optimal given β−i . Under this interpretation each player chooses a
single action rather than a mixed strategy. An equilibrium is a steady
state of the players’ beliefs, not their actions. These beliefs are required
to satisfy two properties: they are common among all players and are
consistent with the assumption that every player is an expected utility
maximizer.
   If we were to start from this idea, we would formulate the notion of
equilibrium as follows.
  44            Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium



I Definition 44.1 A mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of a finite strategic
  game is a mixed strategy profile α∗ with the property that for every
  player i every action in the support of αi∗ is a best response to α−i
                                                                     ∗
                                                                        .
     Lemma 33.2 shows that this definition is equivalent to our previ-
  ous definition (32.3) and thus guarantees that the idea is indeed an
  interpretation of mixed strategy equilibrium.
     Note, however, that when we interpret mixed strategy equilibrium in
  this way the predictive content of an equilibrium is small: it predicts only
  that each player uses an action that is a best response to the equilibrium
  beliefs. The set of such best responses includes any action in the support
  of a player’s equilibrium mixed strategy and may even include actions
  outside the support of this strategy.


  3.3   Correlated Equilibrium

  In Section 3.2.3 we discuss an interpretation of a mixed strategy Nash
  equilibrium as a steady state in which each player’s action depends on a
  signal that he receives from “nature”. In this interpretation the signals
  are private and independent.
     What happens if the signals are not private and independent? Sup-
  pose, for example, that in BoS (see Figure 35.1) both players observe a
  random variable that takes each of the two values x and y with proba-
  bility 21 . Then there is a new equilibrium, in which both players choose
  Bach if the realization is x and Stravinsky if the realization is y. Given
  each player’s information, his action is optimal: if the realization is x
  then he knows that the other player chooses Bach, so that it is optimal
  for him to choose Bach, and symmetrically if the realization is y.
     In this example the players observe the same random variable. More
  generally, their information may be less than perfectly correlated. Sup-
  pose, for example, that there is a random variable that takes the three
  values x, y, and z, and player 1 knows only that the realization is either
  x or that it is a member of {y, z}, while player 2 knows only that it is
  either a member of {x, y} or that it is z. That is, player 1’s information
  partition is {{x}, {y, z}} and player 2’s is {{x, y}, {z}}. Under these
  assumptions a strategy of player 1 consists of two actions: one that she
  uses when she knows that the realization is x and one that she uses
  when she knows that the realization is a member of {y, z}. Similarly, a
  strategy of player 2 consists of two actions, one for {x, y} and one for z.
  A player’s strategy is optimal if, given the strategy of the other player,
  3.3 Correlated Equilibrium                                               45



  for any realization of his information he can do no better by choosing an
  action different from that dictated by his strategy. To illustrate how a
  player uses his information in choosing an optimal action, suppose that
  the probabilities of y and z are η and ζ and player 2’s strategy is to
  take the action a2 if he knows that the realization is in {x, y} and b2
  if he knows that the realization is z. Then if player 1 is informed that
  either y or z has occurred he chooses an action that is optimal given
  that player 2 chooses a2 with probability η/(η + ζ) (the probability of y
  conditional on {y, z}) and b2 with probability ζ/(η + ζ).
     These examples lead us to the following notion of equilibrium.
I Definition 45.1 A correlated equilibrium of a strategic game
  hN, (Ai ), (ui )i consists of
   •   a finite probability space (Ω, π) (Ω is a set of states and π is a
       probability measure on Ω)
   •   for each player i ∈ N a partition Pi of Ω (player i’s information
       partition)
   •   for each player i ∈ N a function σi : Ω → Ai with σi (ω) = σi (ω 0 )
       whenever ω ∈ Pi and ω 0 ∈ Pi for some Pi ∈ Pi (σi is player i’s
       strategy)
  such that for every i ∈ N and every function τi : Ω → Ai for which
  τi (ω) = τi (ω 0 ) whenever ω ∈ Pi and ω 0 ∈ Pi for some Pi ∈ Pi (i.e. for
  every strategy of player i) we have
        X                              X
            π(ω)ui (σ−i (ω), σi (ω)) ≥   π(ω)ui (σ−i (ω), τi (ω)).   (45.2)
        ω∈Ω                           ω∈Ω

     Note that the probability space and information partition are not
  exogenous but are part of the equilibrium. Note also that (45.2) is
  equivalent to the requirement that for every state ω that occurs with
  positive probability the action σi (ω) is optimal given the other players’
  strategies and player i’s knowledge about ω. (This equivalence depends
  on the assumption that the players’ preferences obey expected utility
  theory.)
     We begin by showing that the set of correlated equilibria contains the
  set of mixed strategy Nash equilibria.
  Proposition 45.3 For every mixed strategy Nash equilibrium α of
  a finite strategic game hN, (Ai ), (ui )i there is a correlated equilibrium
  h(Ω, π), (Pi ), (σi )i in which for each player i ∈ N the distribution on Ai
  induced by σi is αi .
  46              Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium



  Proof. Let Ω = A (= ×j∈N Aj ) and define π by π(a) = Πj∈N αj (aj ). For
  each i ∈ N and bi ∈ Ai let Pi (bi ) = {a ∈ A: ai = bi } and let Pi consist
  of the |Ai | sets Pi (bi ). Define σi by σi (a) = ai for each a ∈ A. Then
  h(Ω, π), (Pi ), (σi )i is a correlated equilibrium since (45.2) is satisfied for
  every strategy τi : the left-hand side is player i’s payoff in the mixed
  strategy Nash equilibrium α and the right-hand side is his payoff when
  he uses the mixed strategy in which he chooses the action τi (a) with
  probability αi (ai ) and every other player j uses the mixed strategy αj .
  Further, the distribution on Ai induced by σi is αi .                         2
    The following example is a formal expression of the example with
  which we began this section.
 Example 46.1 The three mixed strategy Nash equilibrium payoff pro-
  files in BoS (see Example 34.1) are (2, 1), (1, 2), and ( 23 , 32 ). In addi-
  tion one of the correlated equilibria yields the payoff profile ( 32 , 32 ): let
  Ω = {x, y}, π(x) = π(y) = 12 , P1 = P2 = {{x}, {y}}, σi (x) = Bach,
  and σi (y) = Stravinsky for i = 1, 2. One interpretation of this equilib-
  rium is that the players observe the outcome of a public coin toss, which
  determines which of the two pure strategy Nash equilibria they play.
       This example suggests the following result.
  Proposition 46.2 Let G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i be a strategic game. Any
  convex combination of correlated equilibrium payoff profiles of G is a
  correlated equilibrium payoff profile of G.
  Proof. Let u1 , . . . , uK be correlated equilibrium payoff profiles and let
                                                            PK
  (λ1 , . . . , λK ) ∈ RK with λk ≥ 0 for all k and k=1 λk = 1. For each
  value of k let h(Ωk , π k ), (Pik ), (σik )i be a correlated equilibrium that gen-
  erates the payoff profile uk ; without loss of generality assume that the
  sets Ωk are disjoint. The following defines a correlated equilibrium for
                                     PK         k k                  k
  which the payoff profile is           k=1 λ u . Let Ω = ∪k Ω , and for any
  ω ∈ Ω define π by π(ω) = λ π (ω) where k is such that ω ∈ Ωk . For
                                       k k

  each i ∈ N let Pi = ∪k Pik and define σi by σi (ω) = σik (ω) where k is
  such that ω ∈ Ωk .                                                              2
    We can interpret the correlated equilibrium constructed in this proof
  as follows: first a public random device determines which of the K
  correlated equilibria is to be played, and then the random variable
  corresponding to the kth correlated equilibrium is realized.
 Example 46.3 Consider the game in the left-hand side of Figure 47.1.
  The Nash equilibrium payoff profiles are (2, 7) and (7, 2) (pure) and
3.3 Correlated Equilibrium                                                          47



                           L      R                      L    R

                     T    6, 6   2, 7              T     y    z

                    B     7, 2   0, 0              B     x    –

Figure 47.1 An example of a correlated equilibrium. On the left is a strategic game.
The table on the right gives the choices of the players as a function of the state in a
correlated equilibrium of the game.


(4 23 , 4 23 ) (mixed). The following correlated equilibrium yields a pay-
off profile that is outside the convex hull of these three profiles. Let
Ω = {x, y, z} and π(x) = π(y) = π(z) = 31 ; let player 1’s partition be
{{x}, {y, z}} and player 2’s be {{x, y}, {z}}. Define the strategies as
follows: σ1 (x) = B and σ1 (y) = σ1 (z) = T ; σ2 (x) = σ2 (y) = L and
σ2 (z) = R. (The relation between the choices and the states is shown in
the right-hand side of Figure 47.1.) Then player 1’s behavior is optimal
given player 2’s: in state x, player 1 knows that player 2 plays L and
thus it is optimal for her to play B; in states y and z she assigns equal
probabilities to player 2 using L and R, so that it is optimal for her to
play T . Symmetrically, player 2’s behavior is optimal given player 1’s,
and hence we have a correlated equilibrium; the payoff profile is (5, 5).
   This example, in which we can identify the set of states with the set
of outcomes, suggests the following result.
Proposition 47.1 Let G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i be a finite strategic game.
Every probability distribution over outcomes that can be obtained in a
correlated equilibrium of G can be obtained in a correlated equilibrium
in which the set of states is A and for each i ∈ N player i’s information
partition consists of all sets of the form {a ∈ A: ai = bi } for some action
bi ∈ Ai .
Proof. Let h(Ω, π), (Pi ), (σi )i be a correlated equilibrium of G. Then
h(Ω0 , π 0 ), (Pi0 ), (σi0 )i is also a correlated equilibrium, where Ω0 = A,
π 0 (a) = π({ω ∈ Ω: σ(ω) = a}) for each a ∈ A, Pi0 consists of sets of the
type {a ∈ A: ai = bi } for some bi ∈ Ai , and σi0 is defined by σi0 (a) = ai .2
   This result allows us to confine attention, when calculating correlated
equilibrium payoffs, to equilibria in which the set of states is the set
of outcomes. Note however that such equilibria may have no natural
interpretation.
 48              Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium



          L            R             L             R             L             R

   T   0, 0, 3       0, 0, 0   T   2, 2, 2       0, 0, 0   T   0, 0, 0       0, 0, 0

   B   1, 0, 0       0, 0, 0   B   0, 0, 0       2, 2, 2   B   0, 1, 0       0, 0, 3

                 A                           B                           C
 Figure 48.1 A three-player game. Player 1 chooses one of the two rows, player 2
 chooses one of the two columns, and player 3 chooses one of the three tables.


    In the definition of a correlated equilibrium we assume that the players
 share a common belief about the probabilities with which the states oc-
 cur. If there is a random variable about which the players hold different
 beliefs then additional equilibrium payoff profiles are possible. Suppose,
 for example, that player 1 is sure that team T1 will beat team T2 in some
 contest, while player 2 is sure that team T2 will win. Then there is an
 equilibrium of BoS (Example 34.1) in which the outcome is (Bach, Bach)
 if T1 wins and (Stravinsky, Stravinsky) if team T2 wins, which gives each
 player an expected payoff of 2! (In Section 5.3 we show that it cannot
 be common knowledge between two players that their beliefs differ in
 the way we have just assumed if they have the same priors.)
? Exercise 48.1   Consider the three-player game with the payoffs given
 in Figure 48.1. (Player 1 chooses one of the two rows, player 2 chooses
 one of the two columns, and player 3 chooses one of the three tables.)
  a. Show that the pure strategy equilibrium payoffs are (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0),
     and (0, 0, 0).
  b. Show that there is a correlated equilibrium in which player 3 chooses
     B and players 1 and 2 play (T, L) and (B, R) with equal probabilities.
  c. Explain the sense in which player 3 prefers not to have the informa-
     tion that players 1 and 2 use to coordinate their actions.

 3.4   Evolutionary Equilibrium

 In this section we describe the basic idea behind a variant of the notion
 of Nash equilibrium called evolutionary equilibrium. This notion is de-
 signed to model situations in which the players’ actions are determined
 by the forces of evolution. We confine the discussion to a simple case in
 which the members of a single population of organisms (animals, human
  3.4 Evolutionary Equilibrium                                                     49



  beings, plants, . . . ) interact with each other pairwise. In each match
  each organism takes an action from a set B. The organisms do not
  consciously choose actions; rather, they either inherit modes of behavior
  from their forebears or are assigned them by mutation. We assume that
  there is a function u that measures each organism’s ability to survive: if
  an organism takes the action a when it faces the distribution β of actions
  in the population of its potential opponents, then its ability to survive
  is measured by the expectation of u(a, b) under β. This description cor-
  responds to a two-player symmetric strategic game h{1, 2}, (B, B), (ui )i
  where u1 (a, b) = u(a, b) and u2 (a, b) = u(b, a).
     A candidate for an evolutionary equilibrium is an action in B. The
  notion of equilibrium is designed to capture a steady state in which all
  organisms take this action and no mutant can invade the population.
  More precisely, the idea is that for every possible action b ∈ B the evo-
  lutionary process occasionally transforms a small fraction of the popula-
  tion into mutants who follow b. In an equilibrium any such mutant must
  obtain an expected payoff lower than that of the equilibrium action, so
  that it dies out. Now, if the fraction  > 0 of the population consists of
  mutants taking the action b while all other organisms take the action b∗ ,
  then the average payoff of a mutant is (1−)u(b, b∗ )+u(b, b) (since with
  probability 1 −  it encounters a non-mutant and with probability  it
  encounters another mutant), while the average payoff of a non-mutant
  is (1 − )u(b∗ , b∗ ) + u(b∗ , b). Therefore for b∗ to be an evolutionary
  equilibrium we require
             (1 − )u(b, b∗ ) + u(b, b) < (1 − )u(b∗ , b∗ ) + u(b∗ , b)
  for all values of  sufficiently small. This inequality is satisfied if and
  only if for every b 6= b∗ either u(b, b∗ ) < u(b∗ , b∗ ), or u(b, b∗ ) = u(b∗ , b∗ )
  and u(b, b) < u(b∗ , b), so that we can define an evolutionary equilibrium
  as follows.
I Definition 49.1 Let G = h{1, 2}, (B, B), (ui )i be a symmetric strate-
  gic game, where u1 (a, b) = u2 (b, a) = u(a, b) for some function u. An
  evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS) of G is an action b∗ ∈ B for
  which (b∗ , b∗ ) is a Nash equilibrium of G and u(b, b) < u(b∗ , b) for every
  best response b ∈ B to b∗ with b 6= b∗ .
    In the following example, as in much of the literature, the set B is
  taken to be the set of mixed strategies over some finite set of actions.
 Example 49.2 (Hawk–Dove) From time to time pairs of animals in a
  population fight over a prey with value 1. Each animal can behave either
50             Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium



                            D                         H

                            1 1
               D            2, 2                      0, 1

                                            1          1
               H            1, 0            2 (1 − c), 2 (1 − c)


                      Figure 50.1 A Hawk–Dove game.



                            γ, γ    1, −1     −1, 1

                           −1, 1     γ, γ     1, −1

                           1, −1    −1, 1      γ, γ

Figure 50.2 A game without an ESS. Each pure strategy yields a mutant a payoff
higher than the unique symmetric equilibrium mixed strategy.


like a dove (D) or like a hawk (H). If both animals in a match are dovish
then they split the value of the prey; if they are both hawkish then the
value of the prey is reduced by c and is split evenly; if one of them is
hawkish and the other is dovish then the hawk gets 1 and the dove 0.
The game is shown in Figure 50.1. (If c > 1, it has the same structure
as that in Figure 17.2.) Let B be the set of all mixed strategies over
{D, H}. If c > 1, the game has a unique symmetric mixed strategy
Nash equilibrium, in which each player uses the strategy (1 − 1/c, 1/c);
this strategy is the only ESS. (In particular, in this case a population
exclusively of hawks is not evolutionarily stable.) If c < 1, the game has
a unique mixed strategy Nash equilibrium in which each player uses the
pure strategy H; this strategy is the only ESS.
   It is immediate from Definition 49.1 that if (b∗ , b∗ ) is a symmetric Nash
equilibrium and no strategy other than b∗ is a best response to b∗ (i.e.
(b∗ , b∗ ) is a strict equilibrium) then b∗ is an ESS. A nonstrict equilibrium
strategy may not be an ESS: consider the two-player symmetric game in
which each player has two actions and u(a, b) = 1 for all (a, b) ∈ B × B.
For a more interesting example of a nonstrict equilibrium strategy that
is not an ESS, consider the game in Figure 50.2 in which B consists of
all mixed strategies over a set containing three members and 0 < γ ≤ 1.
This game has a unique symmetric mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
 Notes                                                                      51



 in which each player’s mixed strategy is ( 31 , 13 , 13 ); in this equilibrium
 the expected payoff of each player is γ/3. A mutant who uses any
 of the three pure strategies obtains an expected payoff of γ/3 when it
 encounters a non-mutant, but the higher payoff γ when it encounters
 another mutant. Hence the equilibrium mixed strategy is not an ESS
 (from which it follows that not every game that has a Nash equilibrium
 has an ESS).
? Exercise 51.1    Show that in every two-player symmetric strategic game
 in which each player has two pure strategies and the payoffs to the four
 strategy profiles are different there is a mixed strategy that is an ESS.


 Notes

 The modern formulation of a mixed strategy is due to Borel (1921; 1924,
 pp. 204–221; 1927), although the idea dates back at least to the early
 eighteenth century (see Guilbaud (1961) and Kuhn (1968)). Borel es-
 tablishes the existence of a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium for some
 special strictly competitive games; von Neumann (1928) proves the exis-
 tence of an equilibrium for all strictly competitive games. The existence
 result (Proposition 33.1) that we prove (which covers all finite strate-
 gic games) is due to Nash (1950a, 1951). The notion of a correlated
 equilibrium is due to Aumann (1974), whose paper is also the basis for
 the other material in Section 3.3. The idea of an evolutionarily stable
 strategy is due to Maynard Smith and Price (see Maynard Smith (1972)
 and Maynard Smith and Price (1973); see also Maynard Smith (1974,
 1982)).
    The large population model mentioned in Section 3.2.2 is due to
 Rosenthal (1979). The idea of interpreting mixed strategies as pure
 strategies in an extended game discussed in Section 3.2.3 is due to
 Harsanyi (1973), as is the content of Section 3.2.4. The interpretation of
 a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium given in Section 3.2.5 is discussed in
 Aumann (1987a). Some of the criticism of mixed strategy Nash equilib-
 rium given in Section 3.2 is taken from Rubinstein (1991). The examples
 in Section 3.3 are due to Aumann (1974).
    Our proof of Proposition 33.1, due to Nash (1950a), appeals to Propo-
 sition 20.3, the proof of which uses Kakutani’s fixed point theorem.
 Nash (1951) presents an alternative proof of Proposition 33.1 that uses
 the more basic fixed point theorem of Brouwer, which applies to point-
 valued functions.
52            Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium



   The game in Exercise 35.1 is taken from Moulin (1986, p. 72). Exer-
cise 36.3 is taken from Arrow, Barankin, and Blackwell (1953).
   For a discussion of mixed strategy Nash equilibrium when the players’
preferences do not satisfy the assumptions necessary to be represented
by expected utility functions see Crawford (1990). The notion of ESS
that we discuss in Section 3.4 has been extended in various directions;
see van Damme (1991, Chapter 9).
   We have not addressed the question of whether there is any dynamic
adjustment process that leads to an equilibrium. One such process,
called fictitious play, is suggested by Brown (1951), and has recently
been reconsidered. In this process each player always chooses a best
response to the statistical frequency of the other players’ past actions.
Robinson (1951) shows that the process converges to a mixed strat-
egy Nash equilibrium in any strictly competitive game; Shapley (1964,
Section 5) shows that this is not necessarily so in games that are not
strictly competitive. Recent research focuses on models that explicitly
capture the forces of evolution and learning; see Battigalli, Gilli, and
Molinari (1992) for an introduction to this work.
4          Rationalizability and Iterated Elimination of
           Dominated Actions




In this chapter we examine the consequences of requiring that a player’s
choice be optimal given a belief consistent with the view that every
player is rational, every player thinks that every player is rational, every
player thinks that every player thinks that every player is rational, and
so on.

4.1   Rationalizability

In Chapters 2 and 3 we discuss solution concepts for strategic games
in which each player’s choice is required to be optimal given his belief
about the other players’ behavior, a belief that is required to be correct.
That is, we assume that each player knows the other players’ equilibrium
behavior. If the players participate repeatedly in the situation that the
game models then they can obtain this knowledge from the steady state
behavior that they observe. However, if the game is a one-shot event
in which all players choose their actions simultaneously then it is not
clear how each player can know the other players’ equilibrium actions;
for this reason game theorists have developed solution concepts that do
not entail this assumption.
   In this chapter we study some such solution concepts, in which the
players’ beliefs about each other’s actions are not assumed to be correct,
but are constrained by considerations of rationality: each player believes
that the actions taken by every other player is a best response to some
belief, and, further, each player assumes that every other player reasons
in this way and hence thinks that every other player believes that every
other player’s action is a best response to some belief, and so on.
   The solution concepts that we study are weaker than Nash equilib-
rium. In fact, in many games they do not exclude any action from being
  54                                               Chapter 4. Rationalizability



  used. Nevertheless we find the approach interesting in that it explores
  the logical implications of assumptions about the players’ knowledge
  that are weaker than those in the previous chapters.
     Fix a strategic game hN, (Ai ), (ui )i (in which the expectation of ui
  represents player i’s preferences over lotteries on A = ×j∈N Aj for each
  i ∈ N ). In order to develop the ideas in this chapter it is not necessary
  to assume that the action set Ai of each player is finite, though for
  simplicity we adopt this assumption in some of the discussion. A belief of
  player i (about the actions of the other players) is a probability measure
  on A−i (= ×j∈N \{i} Aj ). Note that this definition allows a player to
  believe that the other players’ actions are correlated: a belief is not
  necessarily a product of independent probability measures on each of the
  action sets Aj for j ∈ N \ {i}. As before, an action ai ∈ Ai of player i is
  a best response to a belief if there is no other action that yields player i
  a higher payoff given the belief. We frequently use the phrase “player i
  thinks that some other player j is rational”, which we take to mean that
  player i thinks that whatever action player j chooses is a best response
  to player j’s belief about the actions of the players other than j.
     If player i thinks that every other player j is rational then he must be
  able to rationalize his belief µi about the other players’ actions as follows:
  every action of any other player j to which the belief µi assigns positive
  probability must be a best response to a belief of player j. If player i
  further thinks that every other player j thinks that every player h 6= j
  (including player i) is rational then he, player i, must also have a view
  about player j’s view about player h’s beliefs. If player i’s reasoning has
  unlimited depth, we are led to the following definition.
I Definition 54.1 An action ai ∈ Ai is rationalizable in the strategic
  game hN, (Ai ), (ui )i if there exists
   •   a collection ((Xjt )j∈N )∞                 t
                                t=1 of sets with Xj ⊆ Aj for all j and t,
   •   a belief µ1i of player i whose support is a subset of X−i
                                                              1
                                                                 , and
   •   for each j ∈ N , each t ≥ 1, and each aj ∈ Xjt , a belief µt+1
                                                                  j (aj ) of
                                              t+1
       player j whose support is a subset of X−j
  such that
   •   ai is a best response to the belief µ1i of player i
   •   Xi1 = ∅ and for each j ∈ N \ {i} the set Xj1 is the set of all a0j ∈ Aj
       such that there is some a−i in the support of µ1i for which aj = a0j
   •   for every player j ∈ N and every t ≥ 1 every action aj ∈ Xjt is a best
       response to the belief µt+1
                               j (aj ) of player j
  4.1 Rationalizability                                                      55


    •   for each t ≥ 2 and each j ∈ N the set Xjt is the set of all a0j ∈ Aj
        such that there is some player k ∈ N \ {j}, some action ak ∈ Xkt−1 ,
        and some a−k in the support of µtk (ak ) for which a0j = aj .
     Note that formally the second and fourth conditions in the second part
  of this definition are superfluous; we include them so that the definition
  corresponds more closely to the motivation we gave. Note also that
  we include the set Xi1 in the collection ((Xjt )j∈N )∞ t=1 , even though it is
  required to be empty, merely to simplify the notation. If |N | ≥ 3 then
  Xi1 is the only such superfluous set, while if |N | = 2 there are many (Xit
  for any odd t and, for j 6= i, Xjt for any even t).
     The set Xj1 for j ∈ N \ {i} is interpreted to be the set of actions of
  player j that are assigned positive probability by the belief µ1i of player i
  about the actions of the players other than i that justifies i choosing ai .
  For any j ∈ N the interpretation of Xj2 is that it is the set of all actions
  aj of player j such that there exists at least one action ak ∈ Xk1 of some
  player k 6= j that is justified by the belief µ2k (ak ) that assigns positive
  probability to aj .
     To illustrate what the definition entails, suppose there are three play-
  ers, each of whom has two possible actions, A and B. Assume that the
  action A of player 1 is rationalizable and that player 1’s belief µ11 used in
  the rationalization assigns positive probability to the choices of players 2
  and 3 being either (A, A) or (B, B). Then X21 = X31 = {A, B}. The
  beliefs µ22 (A) and µ22 (B) of player 2 that justify his choices of A and
  B concern the actions of players 1 and 3; the beliefs µ23 (A) and µ23 (B)
  of player 3 concern players 1 and 2. These four beliefs do not have to
  induce the same beliefs about player 1 and do not have to assign positive
  probability to the action A. The set X12 consists of all the actions of
  player 1 that are assigned positive probability by µ22 (A), µ23 (A), µ22 (B),
  or µ23 (B).
     This definition of rationalizability is equivalent to the following.
I Definition 55.1 An action ai ∈ Ai is rationalizable in the strategic
  game hN, (Ai ), (ui )i if for each j ∈ N there is a set Zj ⊆ Aj such that
    •   ai ∈ Zi
    •   every action aj ∈ Zj is a best response to a belief µj (aj ) of player j
        whose support is a subset of Z−j .
  Note that if (Zj )j∈N and (Zj0 )j∈N satisfy this definition then so does
  (Zj ∪ Zj0 )j∈N , so that the set of profiles of rationalizable actions is the
  largest set ×j∈N Zj for which (Zj )j∈N satisfies the definition.
  56                                                 Chapter 4. Rationalizability



  Lemma 56.1 Definitions 54.1 and 55.1 are equivalent.
  Proof. If ai ∈ Ai is rationalizable according to Definition 54.1 then define
  Zi = {ai } ∪ (∪∞         t            ∞    t
                    t=1 Xi ) and Zj = (∪t=1 Xj ) for each j ∈ N \ {i}. If it is
  rationalizable according to Definition 55.1 then define µ1i = µi (ai ) and
  µtj (aj ) = µj (aj ) for each j ∈ N and each integer t ≥ 2. Then the sets
  Xjt defined in the second and fourth parts of Definition 54.1 are subsets
  of Zj and satisfy the conditions in the first and third parts.             2
    It is clear from Definition 55.1 that in a finite game any action that
  a player uses with positive probability in some mixed strategy Nash
  equilibrium is rationalizable (take Zj to be the support of player j’s
  mixed strategy). The following result shows that the same is true for
  actions used with positive probability in some correlated equilibrium.
  Lemma 56.2 Every action used with positive probability by some player
  in a correlated equilibrium of a finite strategic game is rationalizable.
  Proof. Denote the strategic game by hN, (Ai ), (ui )i; choose a correlated
  equilibrium, and for each player i ∈ N let Zi be the set of actions that
  player i uses with positive probability in the equilibrium. Then any
  ai ∈ Zi is a best response to the distribution over A−i generated by the
  strategies of the players other than i, conditional on player i choosing
  ai . The support of this distribution is a subset of Z−i and hence by
  Definition 55.1 ai is rationalizable.                                    2
     In the Prisoner’s Dilemma (Example 16.2) only the Nash equilibrium
  action Confess is rationalizable. In all the other games in Section 2.3
  both actions of each player are rationalizable, since in each case both
  actions are used with positive probability in some mixed strategy Nash
  equilibrium. Thus rationalizability puts no restriction on the outcomes
  in these games. For many other games the restrictions that rational-
  izability imposes are weak. However, in some games rationalizability
  provides a sharp answer, as the following exercises demonstrate.
? Exercise 56.3    Find the set of rationalizable actions of each player in
  the two-player game in Figure 57.1.
? Exercise 56.4 (Cournot duopoly)        Consider the strategic game h{1, 2},
  (Ai ), (ui )i in which Ai = [0, 1] and ui (a1 , a2 ) = ai (1 − a1 − a2 ) for i = 1,
  2. Show that each player’s only rationalizable action is his unique Nash
  equilibrium action.
? Exercise 56.5 (Guess the average)     In the game in Exercise 35.1 show
  that each player’s equilibrium action is his unique rationalizable action.
 4.1 Rationalizability                                                       57



                          b1        b2        b3        b4

                  a1     0, 7      2, 5      7, 0      0, 1

                  a2     5, 2      3, 3      5, 2      0, 1

                  a3     7, 0      2, 5      0, 7      0, 1

                  a4     0, 0     0, −2      0, 0    10, −1

               Figure 57.1 The two-player game in Exercise 56.3.


? Exercise 57.1      Suppose that two players choose locations a1 and a2 in
 the unit interval; each wishes to be as close as possible to the other, the
 payoff of each player being −|a1 − a2 |. Show that every action of each
 player is rationalizable, while the set of Nash equilibria is {(a1 , a2 ): a1 =
 a2 }. Now assume that each player is informed of the distance to his
 opponent. Modify Definition 55.1 by adding the condition that the sup-
 port of a belief that rationalizes a pair (ai , d) consisting of an action ai
 and a distance d be a subset of {aj − d, aj + d}. Show that for no d > 0
 is there an action ai for which (ai , d) is rationalizable in this new sense,
 while (ai , 0) is rationalizable for every ai .
    Note that in Definitions 54.1 and 55.1 we take a belief of player i to
 be a probability distribution on A−i , which allows each player to believe
 that his opponents’ actions are correlated. In most of the literature,
 players are not allowed to entertain such beliefs: it is assumed that each
 player’s belief is a product of independent probability distributions, one
 for each of the other players. (Such a restriction is obviously inconse-
 quential in a two-player game.) This assumption is consistent with the
 motivation behind the notion of mixed strategy equilibrium. Our defi-
 nition of rationalizability requires that at all levels of rationalization the
 players be rational; the alternative definition of rationalizability requires
 in addition that at all levels of rationalization the beliefs preserve the
 assumption of independence.
    The two definitions have different implications, as the game in Fig-
 ure 58.1 shows. In this game there are three players; player 1 chooses one
 of the two rows, player 2 chooses one of the two columns, and player 3
 chooses one of the four tables. All three players obtain the same pay-
 offs, given by the numbers in the boxes. We claim that the action M2
58                                                    Chapter 4. Rationalizability



                L     R         L     R         L     R         L     R

           U     8        0      4        0      0        0      3        3

           D     0        0      0        4      0        8      3        3

                     M1              M2              M3              M4

Figure 58.1 A three-player strategic game. Player 1 chooses one of the two rows,
player 2 chooses one of the two columns, and player 3 chooses one of the four tables.
All three players obtain the same payoffs, given by the numbers in the boxes.


of player 3 is rationalizable in the sense of Definitions 54.1 and 55.1,
in which a player may believe that his opponent’s actions are corre-
lated, but is not rationalizable if players are restricted to beliefs that
are products of independent probability distributions. To see this, note
that the action U of player 1 is a best response to a belief that assigns
probability one to (L, M2 ) and the action D is a best response to the
belief that assigns probability one to (R, M2 ); similarly, both actions
of player 2 are best responses to beliefs that assign positive probability
only to U , D, and M2 . Further, the action M2 of player 3 is a best
response to the belief in which players 1 and 2 play (U, L) and (D, R)
with equal probabilities. Thus M2 is rationalizable in the sense that we
have defined (take Z1 = {U, D}, Z2 = {L, R}, and Z3 = {M2 } in Defi-
nition 55.1). However, it is not a best response to any pair of (indepen-
dent) mixed strategies and is thus not rationalizable under the modified
definition in which each player’s belief is restricted to be a product of
independent beliefs. (In order for M2 to be a best response we need
4pq + 4(1 − p)(1 − q) ≥ max{8pq, 8(1 − p)(1 − q), 3}, where (p, 1 − p)
and (q, 1 − q) are mixed strategies of players 1 and 2 respectively, an
inequality that is not satisfied for any values of p and q.)


4.2    Iterated Elimination of Strictly Dominated Actions

Like the notion of rationalizability, the solution concept that we now
study looks at a game from the point of view of a single player. Each
player takes an action based on calculations that do not require knowl-
edge of the actions taken by the other players. To define the solution we
start by eliminating actions that a player should definitely not take. In
a complicated game it is particularly attractive to assume that players,
  4.2 Iterated Elimination of Strictly Dominated Actions                      59



  looking for ways to simplify the situation they confront, will adopt such
  a tack. We assume that players exclude from consideration actions that
  are not best responses whatever the other players do. A player who
  knows that the other players are rational can assume that they too will
  exclude such actions from consideration. Now consider the game G0 ob-
  tained from the original game G by eliminating all such actions. Once
  again, a player who knows that the other players are rational should not
  choose an action that is not a best response whatever the other players
  do in G0 . Further, a player who knows that the other players know that
  he is rational can argue that they too will not choose actions that are
  never best responses in G0 . Continuing to argue in this way suggests that
  the outcome of G must survive an unlimited number of rounds of such
  elimination. We now formalize this idea and show that it is equivalent
  to the notion of rationalizability.


  4.2.1   Never-Best Responses

I Definition 59.1 An action of player i in a strategic game is a never-
  best response if it is not a best response to any belief of player i.
  Clearly any action that is a never-best response is not rationalizable.
  If an action ai of player i is a never-best response then for every belief
  of player i there is some action, which may depend on the belief, that
  is better for player i than ai . We now show that if ai is a never-best
  response in a finite game then there is a mixed strategy that, whatever
  belief player i holds, is better for player i than ai . This alternative
  property is defined precisely as follows.
I Definition 59.2 The action ai ∈ Ai of player i in the strategic game
  hN, (Ai ), (ui )i is strictly dominated if there is a mixed strategy αi
  of player i such that Ui (a−i , αi ) > ui (a−i , ai ) for all a−i ∈ A−i , where
  Ui (a−i , αi ) is the payoff of player i if he uses the mixed strategy αi and
  the other players’ vector of actions is a−i .
     In fact, we show that in a game in which the set of actions of each
  player is finite an action is a never-best response if and only if it is
  strictly dominated. Thus in such games the notion of strict domination
  has a decision-theoretic basis that does not involve mixed strategies. It
  follows that even if one rejects the idea that mixed strategies can be
  objects of choice, one can still argue that a player will not use an action
  that is strictly dominated.
  60                                                 Chapter 4. Rationalizability



  Lemma 60.1 An action of a player in a finite strategic game is a never-
  best response if and only if it is strictly dominated.
  Proof. Let the strategic game be G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i and let a∗i ∈ Ai .
  Consider the auxiliary strictly competitive game G0 (see Definition 21.1)
  in which the set of actions of player 1 is Ai \{a∗i }, that of player 2 is A−i ,
  and the preferences of player 1 are represented by the payoff function v1
  given by v1 (ai , a−i ) = ui (a−i , ai ) − ui (a−i , a∗i ). (Note that the argument
  (ai , a−i ) of v1 is a pair of actions in G0 while the arguments (a−i , ai ) and
  (a−i , a∗i ) are action profiles in G.) For any given mixed strategy profile
  (m1 , m2 ) in G0 we denote by v1 (m1 , m2 ) the expected payoff of player 1.
     The action a∗i is a never-best response in G if and only if for any
  mixed strategy of player 2 in G0 there is an action of player 1 that yields
  a positive payoff; that is, if and only if minm2 maxai v1 (ai , m2 ) > 0. This
  is so if and only if minm2 maxm1 v1 (m1 , m2 ) > 0 (by the linearity of v1
  in m1 ).
     Now, by Proposition 33.1 the game G0 has a mixed strategy Nash
  equilibrium, so from part (b) of Proposition 22.2 applied to the mixed
  extension of G0 we have minm2 maxm1 v1 (m1 , m2 ) > 0 if and only if
  maxm1 minm2 v1 (m1 , m2 ) > 0; that is, if and only if there exists a mixed
  strategy m∗1 of player i in G0 for which v1 (m∗1 , m2 ) > 0 for all m2 (that
  is, for all beliefs on A−i ). Since m∗1 is a probability measure on Ai \ {a∗i }
  it is a mixed strategy of player 1 in G; the condition v1 (m∗1 , m2 ) > 0 for
  all m2 is equivalent to Ui (a−i , m∗1 ) − Ui (a−i , a∗i ) > 0 for all a−i ∈ A−i ,
  which is equivalent to a∗i being strictly dominated.                             2
     Note that the argument in this proof depends upon our assumption
  that the players’ preferences over lotteries satisfy the assumptions of
  von Neumann and Morgenstern; if the preferences do not satisfy these
  assumptions then the properties of being a never-best response and being
  strictly dominated are not equivalent in general.

  4.2.2    Iterated Elimination of Strictly Dominated Actions
  We now define formally the procedure that we described at the beginning
  of the section.
I Definition 60.2 The set X ⊆ A of outcomes of a finite strategic game
  hN, (Ai ), (ui )i survives iterated elimination of strictly dominated
  actions if X = ×j∈N Xj and there is a collection ((Xjt )j∈N )Tt=0 of sets
  that satisfies the following conditions for each j ∈ N .
    •   Xj0 = Aj and XjT = Xj .
 4.2 Iterated Elimination of Strictly Dominated Actions                          61



                                         L      R

                                   T    3, 0   0, 1

                                  M     0, 0   3, 1

                                   B    1, 1   1, 0

 Figure 61.1 A two-player strategic game. The only rationalizable action of player 1
 is M and the only rationalizable action of player 2 is R.


   •   Xjt+1 ⊆ Xjt for each t = 0, . . . , T − 1.
   •   For each t = 0, . . . , T − 1 every action of player j in Xjt \ Xjt+1 is
       strictly dominated in the game hN, (Xit ), (uti )i, where uti for each
       i ∈ N is the function ui restricted to ×j∈N Xjt .
   •   No action in XjT is strictly dominated in the game hN, (XiT ), (uTi )i.
 Example 61.1 In the game in Figure 61.1 the action B is dominated
  by the mixed strategy in which T and M are each used with probability
  1
  2 . After B is eliminated from the game, L is dominated by R; after L
  is eliminated T is dominated by M . Thus (M, R) is the only outcome
  that survives iterated elimination of strictly dominated actions.
    We now show that in a finite game a set of outcomes that survives
 iterated elimination of dominated actions exists and is the set of profiles
 of rationalizable actions.
 Proposition 61.2 If X = ×j∈N Xj survives iterated elimination of
 strictly dominated actions in a finite strategic game hN, (Ai ), (ui )i then
 Xj is the set of player j’s rationalizable actions for each j ∈ N .
 Proof. Suppose that ai ∈ Ai is rationalizable and let (Zj )j∈N be the
 profile of sets in Definition 55.1 that supports ai . For any value of t we
 have Zj ⊆ Xjt since each action in Zj is a best response to some belief
 over Z−j and hence is not strictly dominated in the game hN, (Xit ), (uti )i
 (by Lemma 60.1). Hence ai ∈ Xi .
   We now show that for every j ∈ N every member of Xj is rationaliz-
 able. By definition, no action in Xj is strictly dominated in the game in
 which the set of actions of each player i is Xi , so by Lemma 60.1 every
 action in Xj is a best response among the members of Xj to some belief
 on X−j . We need to show that every action in Xj is a best response
 among all the members of the set Aj to some belief on X−j . If aj ∈ Xj
  62                                                Chapter 4. Rationalizability



  is not a best response among all the members of Aj then there is a value
  of t such that aj is a best response among the members of Xjt to a belief
  µj on X−j , but is not a best response among the members of Xjt−1 .
  Then there is an action bj ∈ Xjt−1 \ Xjt that is a best response among
  the members of Xjt−1 to µj , contradicting the fact that bj is eliminated
  at the tth stage of the procedure.                                      2
     Note that the procedure in Definition 60.2 does not require that all
  strictly dominated strategies be eliminated at any stage. Thus the result
  shows that the order and speed of elimination have no effect on the set
  of outcomes that survive.
     Lemma 60.1 and the equivalence of the notions of iterated elimination
  of strictly dominated actions and rationalizability fail if we modify the
  definition of rationalizability to require the players to believe that their
  opponents’ actions are independent. To see this, consider the game in
  Figure 58.1. The action M2 is a best response to the belief of player 3
  in which players 1 and 2 play (U, L) and (D, R) with equal probabilities
  and is thus not strictly dominated. However, as we saw before, it is not
  a best response to any pair of (independent) mixed strategies and is thus
  not rationalizable under the modified definition in which each player’s
  belief is restricted to be a product of independent beliefs.


  4.3    Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Actions

  We say that a player’s action is weakly dominated if the player has
  another action at least as good no matter what the other players do and
  better for at least some vector of actions of the other players.
I Definition 62.1 The action ai ∈ Ai of player i in the strategic game
  hN, (Ai ), (ui )i is weakly dominated if there is a mixed strategy αi
  of player i such that Ui (a−i , αi ) ≥ ui (a−i , ai ) for all a−i ∈ A−i and
  Ui (a−i , αi ) > ui (a−i , ai ) for some a−i ∈ A−i , where Ui (a−i , αi ) is the
  payoff of player i if he uses the mixed strategy αi and the other players’
  vector of actions is a−i .
    By Lemma 60.1 an action that is weakly dominated but not strictly
  dominated is a best response to some belief. This fact makes the argu-
  ment against using a weakly dominated action weaker than that against
  using a strictly dominated action. Yet since there is no advantage to us-
  ing a weakly dominated action, it seems very natural to eliminate such
  actions in the process of simplifying a complicated game.
  4.3 Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Actions                          63



                                        L      R

                                  T    1, 1   0, 0

                                 M     1, 1   2, 1

                                  B    0, 0   2, 1

  Figure 63.1 A two-player game in which the set of actions that survive iterated
  elimination of weakly dominated actions depends on the order in which actions are
  eliminated.


    The notion of weak domination leads to a procedure analogous to it-
  erated elimination of strictly dominated actions (Definition 60.2). How-
  ever, this procedure is less compelling since the set of actions that sur-
  vive iterated elimination of weakly dominated actions may depend on
  the order in which actions are eliminated, as the two-player game in
  Figure 63.1 shows. The sequence in which we first eliminate T (weakly
  dominated by M ) and then L (weakly dominated by R) leads to an out-
  come in which player 2 chooses R and the payoff profile is (2, 1). On the
  other hand, the sequence in which we first eliminate B (weakly domi-
  nated by M ) and then R (weakly dominated by L) leads to an outcome
  in which player 2 chooses L and the payoff profile is (1, 1). We dis-
  cuss further the procedure of iterated elimination of weakly dominated
  actions in Section 6.6.
? Exercise 63.1    Consider a variant of the game in Example 18.6 in which
  there are two players, the distribution of the citizens’ favorite positions
  is uniform, and each player is restricted to choose a position of the form
  `/m for some ` ∈ {0, . . . , m}, where m is even. Show that the only
  outcome that survives iterated elimination of weakly dominated actions
  is that in which both players choose the position 12 .
? Exercise 63.2 (Dominance solvability)      A strategic game is dominance
  solvable if all players are indifferent between all outcomes that survive
  the iterative procedure in which all the weakly dominated actions of
  each player are eliminated at each stage. Give an example of a strategic
  game that is dominance solvable but for which it is not the case that
  all players are indifferent between all outcomes that survive iterated
  elimination of weakly dominated actions (a procedure in which not all
  weakly dominated actions may be eliminated at each stage).
 64                                                  Chapter 4. Rationalizability



? Exercise 64.1    Each of two players announces a nonnegative integer
 equal to at most 100. If a1 +a2 ≤ 100, where ai is the number announced
 by player i, then each player i receives payoff of ai . If a1 + a2 > 100
 and ai < aj then player i receives ai and player j receives 100 − ai ; if
 a1 + a2 > 100 and ai = aj then each player receives 50. Show that the
 game is dominance solvable (see the previous exercise) and find the set
 of surviving outcomes.
    Lemma 60.1 shows that in a finite game an action that is not strictly
 dominated is a best response to some belief. The following exercise
 strengthens this conclusion for an action (or mixed strategy) that is not
 weakly dominated.
? Exercise 64.2    Show that in a finite strategic game any mixed strategy
 of a player that is not weakly dominated is a best response to a belief
 that assigns positive probability to every vector of actions of the other
 players. [Hint: Let hN, (Ai ), (ui )i be the game and let U be the set of
 all vectors of the form (u1 (a1−1 , m1 ), . . . , u1 (ak−1 , m1 )), where m1 ranges
 over the mixed strategies of player 1 and {a1−1 , . . . , ak−1 } is the set of
 all vectors of actions for the players other than player 1. Let u∗ ∈ U
 correspond to a mixed strategy of player 1 that is not weakly dominated.
 You need to show that there exists a positive vector p∗ with p∗ ·u∗ ≥ p∗ ·u
 for all u ∈ U . To do so, let u∗ = 0 without loss of generality, and for
                                                                  Pk
 any  > 0 let P () = {p ∈ Rk : pi ≥  for all i and                i=1 pi = 1}. Use
 the result of Exercise 36.3 for the sets P () and U and let  → 0; use
 also the fact that U is the convex hull of a finite number of vectors.]

 Notes

 The notion of rationalizability originated with Bernheim (1984) and
 Pearce (1984) (both of whom restrict players to believe that the actions
 of their opponents are independent). (Spohn (1982) discusses the idea,
 but does not formalize it.) Versions of the procedure of iterated elimina-
 tion of dominated strategies were first studied in detail by Gale (1953)
 and Luce and Raiffa (1957, pp. 108–109, 173); the formulation that we
 give is due to Moulin (1979). Lemma 60.1 is due to Pearce (1984); it is
 closely related to Lemma 3.2.1 of van Damme (1983). Proposition 61.2
 is due to Pearce (1984, p. 1035).
    The result in Exercise 56.4 is due to Gabay and Moulin (1980),
 Bernheim (1984), and Moulin (1984). Exercise 56.5 is taken from
 Moulin (1986, p. 72). Exercise 57.1 is taken from Rubinstein and Wolin-
Notes                                                                    65



sky (1994). The notion of dominance solvability in Exercise 63.2 is due
to Moulin (1979); it is closely related to the notion of “solvability in the
complete weak sense” of Luce and Raiffa (1957, p. 109). Exercise 64.1
is due to Brams and Taylor (1994) and Exercise 64.2 is due to Arrow,
Barankin, and Blackwell (1953).
   For a family of games in which rationalizability gives a sharp answer
see Vives (1990) and Milgrom and Roberts (1990).
5          Knowledge and Equilibrium




In this chapter we describe a model of knowledge and use it to formalize
the idea that an event is “common knowledge”, to ask if it is possible for
people to “agree to disagree”, and to express formally the assumptions
on players’ knowledge that lie behind the concepts of Nash equilibrium
and rationalizability.

5.1     A Model of Knowledge

A strategic game models interaction between players. Consequently we
are interested not only in a player’s knowledge of an exogenous param-
eter but also in his knowledge about the knowledge of another player.
We begin by giving a brief introduction to a model of the knowledge of
a single decision-maker.
   At the basis of the model is a set Ω of states. The notion of a state
is given two interpretations in the literature. At one extreme, a state
is viewed as a description of the contingencies that the decision-maker
perceives to be relevant in the context of a certain decision problem. This
is the interpretation used in standard economic models of uncertainty.
At the other extreme a state is viewed as a full description of the world,
including not only the decision-maker’s information and beliefs but also
his actions.

5.1.1   The Information Function
One way to define the extent of a decision-maker’s knowledge of the
state is to specify an information function P that associates with every
state ω ∈ Ω a nonempty subset P (ω) of Ω. The interpretation is that
when the state is ω the decision-maker knows only that the state is in
  68                                      Chapter 5. Knowledge and Equilibrium



  the set P (ω). That is, he considers it possible that the true state could
  be any state in P (ω) but not any state outside P (ω).
I Definition 68.1 An information function for the set Ω of states is
  a function P that associates with every state ω ∈ Ω a nonempty subset
  P (ω) of Ω.
    When we use an information function to model a decision-maker’s
  knowledge we usually assume that the pair hΩ, P i consisting of the set of
  states and the information function satisfies the following two conditions:
       P1 ω ∈ P (ω) for every ω ∈ Ω.
       P2   If ω 0 ∈ P (ω) then P (ω 0 ) = P (ω).
  P1 says that the decision-maker never excludes the true state from the
  set of states he regards as feasible: he is never certain that the state
  is different from the true state. P2 says that the decision-maker uses
  the consistency or inconsistency of states with his information to make
  inferences about the state. Suppose, contrary to P2, that ω 0 ∈ P (ω)
  and there is a state ω 00 ∈ P (ω 0 ) with ω 00 ∈
                                                 / P (ω). Then if the state is
  ω the decision-maker can argue that since ω 00 is inconsistent with his
  information the true state cannot be ω 0 . Similarly, if there is a state
  ω 00 ∈ P (ω) with ω 00 ∈
                         / P (ω 0 ) then when the state is ω the decision-maker
  can argue that since ω 00 is consistent with his information the true state
  cannot be ω 0 .
     The following condition is equivalent to P1 and P2.
I Definition 68.2 An information function P for the set Ω of states is
  partitional if there is a partition of Ω such that for any ω ∈ Ω the set
  P (ω) is the element of the partition that contains ω.

  Lemma 68.3 An information function is partitional if and only if it
  satisfies P1 and P2.
  Proof. If P is partitional then it clearly satisfies P1 and P2. Now
  suppose that P satisfies P1 and P2. If P (ω) and P (ω 0 ) intersect and
  ω 00 ∈ P (ω) ∩ P (ω 0 ) then by P2 we have P (ω) = P (ω 0 ) = P (ω 00 ); by P1
  we have ∪ω∈Ω P (ω) = Ω. Thus P is partitional.                               2
   Given this result, an information function that satisfies P1 and P2
  may be specified by the information partition that it induces.
 Example 68.4 Let Ω = [0, 1) and assume that the decision-maker
  observes only the first four digits of the infinite decimal expansion of a
  number. Then for each ω ∈ Ω the set P (ω) is the set of all states ω 0 ∈ Ω
 5.1 A Model of Knowledge                                                   69



 such that the first four digits of ω 0 are the same as those of ω. This
 information function is partitional.
? Exercise 69.1    Let Q be a set of questions to which the answer is either
 “Yes” or “No”. A state is a list of answers to all the questions in Q.
 Suppose that the information function P has the property that for some
 state ω1 the set P (ω1 ) consists of all states in which the answers to the
 first two questions are the same as in ω1 , while for some other state ω2
 the set P (ω2 ) consists of all states in which the answers to the first three
 questions are the same as in ω2 . Is P necessarily partitional?
? Exercise 69.2     A decision-maker is told an integer n but remembers
 only that the number is either n − 1, n, or n + 1. Model the decision-
 maker’s knowledge by an information function and determine if the
 function is partitional.

 5.1.2   The Knowledge Function
 We refer to a set of states (a subset of Ω) as an event. Given our
 interpretation of an information function, a decision-maker for whom
 P (ω) ⊆ E knows, in the state ω, that some state in the event E has
 occurred. In this case we say that in the state ω the decision-maker
 knows E. Given P we now define the decision maker’s knowledge
 function K by
                      K(E) = {ω ∈ Ω: P (ω) ⊆ E}.                 (69.3)
 For any event E the set K(E) is the set of all states in which the decision-
 maker knows E. The knowledge function K that is derived from any
 information function satisfies the following three properties.
   K1    K(Ω) = Ω.
 This says that in all states the decision-maker knows that some state in
 Ω has occurred.
   K2    If E ⊆ F then K(E) ⊆ K(F ).
 This says that if F occurs whenever E occurs and the decision-maker
 knows E then he knows F : if E implies F then knowledge of E implies
 knowledge of F .
   K3    K(E) ∩ K(F ) = K(E ∩ F ).
 The interpretation of this property is that if the decision-maker knows
 both E and F then he knows E ∩ F .
70                                Chapter 5. Knowledge and Equilibrium



  If P satisfies P1 then the associated knowledge function K satisfies
the following additional property.
     K4 (Axiom of Knowledge)   K(E) ⊆ E.
This says that whenever the decision-maker knows E then indeed some
member of E is the true state: the decision-maker does not know any-
thing that is false. The axiom is derived from P1 as follows: if ω ∈ K(E)
then P (ω) ⊆ E, so that by P1 we have ω ∈ E.
  If P is partitional (i.e. satisfies both P1 and P2) then K(E) is the
union of all the members of the partition that are subsets of E. (If E
does not contain any member of the partition then K(E) is empty.) In
this case the knowledge function K satisfies the following two additional
properties.
     K5 (Axiom of Transparency) K(E) ⊆ K(K(E)).
Given our interpretation of K(E) as the event in which the decision-
maker knows E, we interpret K(K(E)) to be the event in which the
decision-maker knows that he knows E. Thus K5 says that if the
decision-maker knows E then he knows that he knows E. As we re-
marked above, if P satisfies P1 and P2 then the set K(E) is a union of
members of the partition induced by P ; K5 follows from the observation
that if F is a union of members of the partition then K(F ) = F .
     K6 (Axiom of Wisdom)   Ω \ K(E) ⊆ K(Ω \ K(E)).
The interpretation of this axiom is that the decision-maker is aware of
what he does not know: if he does not know E then he knows that he
does not know E. Since P is partitional, K(E) is a union of members
of the partition induced by P ; thus Ω \ K(E) also is such a union, and
K6 follows.
   Note that given that K satisfies K4 the properties in K5 and K6 in
fact hold with equality.
   We have taken an information function as the primitive and derived
from it a knowledge function. Alternatively we can start by defining a
knowledge function for the set Ω to be a function K that associates
a subset of Ω with each event E ⊆ Ω. We can then derive from it an
information function P as follows: for each state ω let

                    P (ω) = ∩{E ⊆ Ω: K(E) 3 ω}.                    (70.1)

(If there is no event E for which ω ∈ K(E) then we take the intersection
to be Ω.)
 5.1 A Model of Knowledge                                                        71



? Exercise 71.1

  a. Given an information function P , let K be the knowledge function
     defined by (69.3) and let P 0 be the information function derived from
     K in (70.1). Show that P 0 = P .
  b. Given a knowledge function K that satisfies K1, K2, and K3, let
     P be the information function defined by (70.1) and let K 0 be the
     knowledge function derived from P in (69.3). Show that K 0 = K.
? Exercise 71.2     Using the framework we have described, we can for-
 mulate an individual’s decision problem as follows. Let A be a set of
 actions, Ω a set of states, P a partitional information function, π a
 probability measure on Ω, and u: A × Ω → R a function whose ex-
 pected value represents the individual’s preferences over lotteries on A.
 The individual’s problem is to choose a function a: Ω → A (called an
 act) for which a(ω) = a(ω 0 ) whenever ω ∈ P (ω) and ω 0 ∈ P (ω) to
 solve maxa Eπ u(a(ω), ω) (where E is the expectation operator). Define
 the partitional information function P 0 to be coarser than the informa-
 tion function P if P (ω) ⊆ P 0 (ω) for all ω ∈ Ω (i.e. if each member
 of the partition induced by P 0 is a union of members of the parti-
 tion induced by P ). Show that if P 0 is coarser than P then the best
 act under the information function P 0 is no better than the best act
 under the information function P . Contrast this result with that of
 Exercise 28.2.


 5.1.3   An Illustrative Example: The Puzzle of the Hats

 The following puzzle, which “swept Europe” some time in the first half of
 the twentieth century (Littlewood (1953, p. 3)), illustrates the concepts
 that we have defined. Each of n “perfectly rational” individuals, seated
 around a table, is wearing a hat that is either white or black. Each
 individual can see the hats of the other n − 1 individuals, but not his
 own. An observer announces: “Each of you is wearing a hat that is
 either white or black; at least one of the hats is white. I will start to
 count slowly. After each number you will have the opportunity to raise
 a hand. You may do so only when you know the color of your hat.”
 When, for the first time, will any individual raise his hand?
    We can answer this question by using the formal model we have in-
 troduced, as follows. Initially, after the observer’s announcement, the
 set of states is the set of all configurations c = (c1 , . . . , cn ) of colors for
72                                   Chapter 5. Knowledge and Equilibrium



the hats, where each ci is either W or B and at least one ci is W . These
2n − 1 states constitute the set

                  Ω = {c ∈ {B, W }n : |{i: ci = W }| ≥ 1}.

The initial information function Pi1 of any individual i is given as follows:
in any state c the set Pi1 (c) consists of all the states that accord with i’s
observations, and thus contains at most two states, which differ only in
the color of i’s hat. Precisely, if c is a state in which a player different
from i has a white hat then Pi1 (c) = {(c−i , W ), (c−i , B)}, and if c is the
state in which all the other hats are black then Pi1 (c) = {c} (since not
all the hats are black).
   What does it mean for an individual i with information function Pi
to “know the color ci of his hat”? It means either he knows that the
event {c: ci = W } occurs or he knows that the event {c: ci = B} occurs.
Thus the event “i knows the color of his hat” is

          Ei = {c: Pi (c) ⊆ {c: ci = B} or Pi (c) ⊆ {c: ci = W }}.

It is only in a state c in which there is exactly one individual i for whom
ci = W that Pj1 (c) ⊆ Ej for some j, and in this case Pi1 (c) ⊆ Ei , so that
i raises his hand.
   Now let F 1 = {c: |{i: ci = W }| = 1}, the set of states for which
someone raises a hand at the first stage. If nobody raises a hand at
the first stage then all individuals obtain the additional information
that the state is not in F 1 , and thus for all i and for all c ∈
                                                                / F 1 we have
Pi2 (c) = Pi1 (c)\F 1 . That is, in any such state every individual concludes
that at least two individuals have white hats. We have Pi2 (c) = Pi1 (c) =
{(c−i , W ), (c−i , B)} unless cj = W for exactly one individual j 6= i, in
which case Pi2 (c−i , W ) = {(c−i , W )} (and Pj2 (c−j , W ) = {(c−j , W )}).
In other words, in any state c for which cj = W and ch = W for
precisely two individuals j and h we have Pj2 (c) ⊆ Ej and Ph2 (c) ⊆ Eh ,
and hence j and h each raises a hand at the second stage. Now let
F 2 = {c: |{i: ci = W }| = 2}, the set of states in which the process ends
at the second stage. In states for which no hand is raised after the
observer counts 2 (c ∈   / F 1 ∪ F 2 ) all individuals conclude that at least
three hats are white and the process continues with Pi3 (c) = Pi2 (c) \ F 2 .
It is easy to see that if k hats are white then no one raises a hand until
the observer counts k, at which point the k individuals with white hats
do so.
  5.2 Common Knowledge                                                    73



  5.2   Common Knowledge

  We say that an event is “mutual knowledge” in some state if in that
  state each individual knows the event. We say that an event is “common
  knowledge” if not only is it mutual knowledge but also each individual
  knows that all other individuals know it, each individual knows that
  all other individuals know that all the individuals know it, and so on.
  Restricting for simplicity to the case of two individuals the notion of
  common knowledge is formalized in the following definition.
I Definition 73.1 Let K1 and K2 be the knowledge functions of indi-
  viduals 1 and 2 for the set Ω of states. An event E ⊆ Ω is common
  knowledge between 1 and 2 in the state ω ∈ Ω if ω is a mem-
  ber of every set in the infinite sequence K1 (E), K2 (E), K1 (K2 (E)),
  K2 (K1 (E)), . . . .
     Another definition of common knowledge (which we show in Proposi-
  tion 74.2 is equivalent) is stated in terms of the individuals’ information
  functions.
I Definition 73.2 Let P1 and P2 be the information functions of indi-
  viduals 1 and 2 for the set Ω of states. An event F ⊆ Ω is self-evident
  between 1 and 2 if for all ω ∈ F we have Pi (ω) ⊆ F for i = 1, 2. An
  event E ⊆ Ω is common knowledge between 1 and 2 in the state
  ω ∈ Ω if there is a self-evident event F for which ω ∈ F ⊆ E.
  In words, an event E is self-evident between two individuals if whenever
  it occurs both individuals know that it occurs (i.e. whenever it occurs
  it is mutual knowledge between the individuals), and is common knowl-
  edge in the state ω if there is a self-evident event containing ω whose
  occurrence implies E.
 Example 73.3 Let Ω = {ω1 , ω2 , ω3 , ω4 , ω5 , ω6 }, let P1 and P2 be the
  partitional information functions of individuals 1 and 2, and let K1 and
  K2 be the associated knowledge functions. Let the partitions induced
  by the information functions be

                   P1 = {{ω1 , ω2 }, {ω3 , ω4 , ω5 }, {ω6 }}
                   P2 = {{ω1 }, {ω2 , ω3 , ω4 }, {ω5 }, {ω6 }}.

  The event E = {ω1 , ω2 , ω3 , ω4 } does not contain any event that is self-
  evident between 1 and 2 and hence in no state is E common knowledge
  between 1 and 2 in the sense of the second definition (73.2). The event
  E is also not common knowledge in any state in the sense of the first
74                                     Chapter 5. Knowledge and Equilibrium



definition (73.1) since K1 (K2 (K1 (E))) = ∅, as the following calculation
demonstrates:
                  K1 (E) = {ω1 , ω2 },          K2 (E) = E,
             K2 (K1 (E)) = {ω1 },          K1 (K2 (E)) = {ω1 , ω2 },
         K1 (K2 (K1 (E))) = ∅,         K2 (K1 (K2 (E))) = {ω1 }.
   The event F = {ω1 , ω2 , ω3 , ω4 , ω5 } is self-evident between 1 and 2 and
hence is common knowledge between 1 and 2 in any state in F in the
sense of the second definition. Since K1 (F ) = K2 (F ) = F the event F is
also common knowledge between 1 and 2 at any state in F in the sense
of the first definition.
  Before showing that the two definitions of common knowledge are
equivalent we establish the following.
Lemma 74.1 Let P1 and P2 be the partitional information functions of
individuals 1 and 2 for the set Ω of states, let K1 and K2 be the asso-
ciated knowledge functions, and let E be an event. Then the following
three conditions are equivalent.
a. Ki (E) = E for i = 1, 2.
b. E is self-evident between 1 and 2.
 c. E is a union of members of the partition induced by Pi for i = 1, 2.
Proof. Assume (a). Then for every ω ∈ E we have Pi (ω) ⊆ E for i = 1,
2, and hence (b) is satisfied. Assume (b). Then E = ∪ω∈E Pi (ω) for
i = 1, 2, and thus E is a union of members of both partitions, so that
(c) is satisfied. Finally (c) immediately implies (a).              2
     We now show that Definitions 73.1 and 73.2 are equivalent.
Proposition 74.2 Let Ω be a finite set of states, let P1 and P2 be
the partitional information functions of individuals 1 and 2, and let K1
and K2 be the associated knowledge functions. Then an event E ⊆ Ω
is common knowledge between 1 and 2 in the state ω ∈ Ω according to
Definition 73.1 if and only if it is common knowledge between 1 and 2
in the state ω according to Definition 73.2.
Proof. Assume that the event E is common knowledge between 1 and 2
in the state ω according to Definition 73.1. For each i ∈ {1, 2} and j 6= i
we have E ⊇ Ki (E) ⊇ Kj (Ki (E)) ⊇ Ki (Kj (Ki (E))) ⊇ . . . and ω is a
member of all these sets, which are hence nonempty. Thus since Ω is
finite there is a set Fi = Ki (Kj (Ki · · · Ki (E) · · ·)) for which Kj (Fi ) = Fi ;
since Pi is partitional, Ki satisfies K4 and K5, so that we have also
5.3 Can People Agree to Disagree?                                         75



Ki (Fi ) = Fi . Thus by Lemma 74.1 the event Fi is self-evident between 1
and 2, so that E is common knowledge in ω according to Definition 73.2.
   Now assume that E ⊆ Ω is common knowledge between 1 and 2 in
the state ω according to Definition 73.2. Then there is a self-evident
event F with ω ∈ F ⊆ E. By Lemma 74.1 every set of the type
Ki (Kj (Ki · · · Ki (F ) · · ·)) coincides with F . It follows from K2 that ω
is a member of every set of the type Ki (Kj (Ki · · · Ki (E) · · ·)) and thus
E is common knowledge in ω according to Definition 73.1.                    2


5.3   Can People Agree to Disagree?

An interesting question that can be addressed within the framework we
have described is the following. Can it be common knowledge between
two individuals with the same prior belief that individual 1 assigns prob-
ability η1 to some event and individual 2 assigns probability η2 6= η1 to
the same event? It seems that the answer could be positive: the individ-
uals might “agree to disagree” in this way when they possess different
information. However, we now show that if the individuals’ information
functions are partitional then the answer is negative.
   One of the contexts in which this result is of interest is that of a
Bayesian game (Section 2.6). An assumption often made in the literature
is that the players in such a game have identical prior beliefs. The result
implies that under this assumption it cannot be common knowledge
between the players that they assign different posterior probabilities to
the same event. Thus if we want to model a situation in which such
differences in beliefs are common knowledge, we must assume that the
players’ prior beliefs are different.
   Let ρ be a probability measure on the set Ω of states, interpreted as the
individuals’ common prior belief, and let P1 and P2 be the individuals’
information functions. If E is an event and ρ(E|Pi (ω)) = ηi (where
ρ(E|Pi (ω)) is the probability of E conditional on Pi (ω)) then, given his
information in the state ω, individual i assigns the probability ηi to the
event E. Thus the event “individual i assigns the probability ηi to E”
is {ω ∈ Ω: ρ(E|Pi (ω)) = ηi }.
Proposition 75.1 Suppose that the set Ω of states is finite and individ-
uals 1 and 2 have the same prior belief. If each individual’s information
function is partitional and it is common knowledge between 1 and 2
in some state ω ∗ ∈ Ω that individual 1 assigns probability η1 to some
event E and individual 2 assigns probability η2 to E then η1 = η2 .
 76                                     Chapter 5. Knowledge and Equilibrium



 Proof. If the assumptions are satisfied then there is a self-evident event
 F 3 ω ∗ that is a subset of the intersection of {ω ∈ Ω: ρ(E|P1 (ω)) = η1 }
 and {ω ∈ Ω: ρ(E|P2 (ω)) = η2 }, and hence a subset of each of these sets,
 where ρ is the common prior belief. By Lemma 74.1, for each individual i
 the event F is a union of members of i’s information partition. Since Ω
 is finite, so is the number of sets in each union; let F = ∪k Ak = ∪k Bk .
 Now, for any nonempty disjoint sets C and D with ρ(E|C) = ηi and
 ρ(E|D) = ηi we have ρ(E|C ∪ D) = ηi . Thus, since for each k we have
 ρ(E|Ak ) = η1 , it follows that ρ(E|F ) = η1 ; similarly ρ(E|F ) = η2 .
 Hence η1 = η2 .                                                         2
? Exercise 76.1   Show that if two individuals with partitional informa-
 tion functions have the same prior then it can be common knowledge be-
 tween them that they assign different probabilities to some event. Show,
 however, that it cannot be common knowledge that the probability
 assigned by individual 1 exceeds that assigned by individual 2.
? Exercise 76.2   Show that if two individuals with partitional informa-
 tion functions have the same prior then it cannot be common knowledge
 between them that individual 1 believes the expectation of some lottery
 to exceed some number η while individual 2 believes this expectation
 to be less than η. Show by an example that this result depends on the
 assumption that the individuals’ information functions are partitional.

 5.4       Knowledge and Solution Concepts

 In the previous chapters we discussed the concepts of Nash equilibrium
 and rationalizability. When motivating these concepts we appealed in-
 formally to assumptions about what the players know. In this section we
 use the model described above to examine formally assumptions about
 the players’ knowledge that lie behind the solution concepts.
   Throughout we fix attention on a given strategic game G = hN, (Ai ),
 (%i )i (see Definition 11.1).
   Let Ω be a set of states, each of which is a description of the envi-
 ronment relevant to the game: that is, a description of each player’s
 knowledge, action, and belief. Formally, each state ω ∈ Ω consists of a
 specification for each player i of
      •   Pi (ω) ⊆ Ω, which describes player i’s knowledge in state ω (where
          Pi is a partitional information function)
      •   ai (ω) ∈ Ai , the action chosen by player i in state ω
5.4 Knowledge and Solution Concepts                                       77


  •   µi (ω), a probability measure on A−i = ×j∈N \{i} Aj , the belief of
      player i in state ω about the actions of the other players. (Note
      that this allows a player to believe that the other players’ actions
      are correlated.)
Note that the notion of a state, since it consists of a specification of the
knowledge, action, and belief of each player, may be self-referential: if in
state ω1 some player does not know whether the state is ω1 or ω2 then
the description of ω1 refers to itself.
   Our implicit assumption in this definition of the set of states is that it
is common knowledge among the players that the game is G. Thus we
ignore the possibility, for example, that some player does not know his
own action set or the action set of another player, or some player i does
not know whether player j knows player i’s preferences. This assumption
is stronger than we need for some of the results. To formalize weaker
assumptions about the players’ knowledge of the game we would need
to extend the definition of the set of states, requiring that each state
include a specification of the game that is played.
   We now isolate properties of a state that imply that the actions in
that state are consistent with various solution concepts. Our first result
is that if in some state each player is rational, knows the other players’
actions, and has a belief consistent with his knowledge, then the profile
of actions chosen in that state is a Nash equilibrium of the game.
Proposition 77.1 Suppose that in the state ω ∈ Ω each player i ∈ N
a. knows the other players’ actions: Pi (ω) ⊆ {ω 0 ∈ Ω : a−i (ω 0 ) =
   a−i (ω)};
b. has a belief that is consistent with his knowledge: the support of µi (ω)
   is a subset of {a−i (ω 0 ) ∈ A−i : ω 0 ∈ Pi (ω)};
c. is rational: ai (ω) is a best response of player i to µi (ω).
Then (ai (ω))i∈N is a Nash equilibrium of G.
Proof. By (c) the action ai (ω) is a best response of player i to his belief,
which by (b) assigns probability one to the set {a−i (ω 0 ) ∈ A−i : ω 0 ∈
Pi (ω)}; by (a) this set is {a−i (ω)}.                                     2
  The assumption that each player knows the actions of all the other
players is very strong. We now show that in a two-player game we can
replace it with the assumption that each player knows the belief of the
other player if we strengthen (c) to require not only that each player be
rational but also that each player know that the other player is rational.
Since the result involves mixed strategies we now let the strategic game
78                                    Chapter 5. Knowledge and Equilibrium



under consideration be G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i, where for each i ∈ N the
expected value of the function ui represents player i’s preferences over
lotteries on A.
Proposition 78.1 Suppose that |N | = 2 and that in the state ω ∈ Ω
each player i ∈ N
a. knows the other player’s belief: Pi (ω) ⊆ {ω 0 ∈ Ω: µj (ω 0 ) = µj (ω)}
   for j 6= i;
b. has a belief that is consistent with his knowledge: the support of µi (ω)
   is a subset of {aj (ω 0 ) ∈ Aj : ω 0 ∈ Pi (ω)} for j 6= i;
c. knows that the other is rational: for any ω 0 ∈ Pi (ω) the action aj (ω 0 )
   is a best response of player j to µj (ω 0 ) for j 6= i.
Then the mixed strategy profile (α1 , α2 ) = (µ2 (ω), µ1 (ω)) is a mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium of G.
Proof. Let a∗i be an action of player i that is in the support of αi = µj (ω).
By (b) there is a state ω 0 ∈ Pj (ω) such that ai (ω 0 ) = a∗i . It follows from
(c) that the action a∗i is a best response of player i to µi (ω 0 ), which by
(a) is equal to µi (ω).                                                        2
   Note that neither proposition requires the players to derive their be-
liefs from some common prior on Ω. In particular, note that in (b) we
require only that each player’s belief be consistent with his knowledge.
Note also that the assumption that the game is common knowledge
can be weakened in both results: in Proposition 77.1 it is sufficient
to assume each player knows his own action set and preferences, and in
Proposition 78.1 it is sufficient to assume the game is mutual knowledge.
   The following example demonstrates that Proposition 78.1 does not
have an analog when there are more than two players. Consider the
game at the top of Figure 79.1. (Note that player 3’s payoff is always 0.)
Let the set of states be Ω = {α, β, γ, δ, , ξ} and let the players’ action
functions and information functions be those given in the table at the
bottom of the figure; assume that the players’ beliefs are derived from
the same prior, which is given in the first row of the table.
   Consider the state δ. We claim that the three conditions of the propo-
sition are satisfied. Condition (b) is satisfied since each player’s belief
at δ is defined from the common prior. It remains to verify that in this
state each player knows the beliefs of the other players and knows that
the other players are rational. Consider player 1. She knows that the
state is either δ or , so that she knows that player 2’s information is
either {γ, δ} or {, ξ}. In both cases player 2 believes that with prob-
5.4 Knowledge and Solution Concepts                                                    79



                       L             R                       L           R

               U     2, 3, 0       2, 0, 0         U     0, 0, 0       0, 2, 0

               D     0, 3, 0       0, 0, 0         D     3, 0, 0       3, 2, 0

                               A                                   B

                     State          α         β         γ         δ              ξ
          Probability×63            32        16        8         4       2       1
                1’s action          U         D         D         D       D       D
                2’s action          L         L         L         L       L       L
                3’s action          A         B         A         B       A       B
             1’s partition         {α}       {β         γ}       {δ       }     {ξ}
             2’s partition         {α         β}       {γ         δ}     {       ξ}
             3’s partition         {α}       {β}       {γ}       {δ}     {}     {ξ}

Figure 79.1 At the top is a three-player game in which player 1 chooses one of the
two rows, player 2 chooses one of the two columns, and player 3 chooses one of the
two tables. At the bottom are action functions, information functions, and beliefs
for the players in the game.


ability 23 the pair of actions chosen by players 1 and 3 is (D, A) and
that with probability 13 it is (D, B). Given this belief, the action L that
player 2 takes is optimal. Thus player 1 knows that player 2 is rational.
   Similarly player 2 knows that player 1’s information is either {β, γ} or
{δ, }. In both cases player 1 believes that with probability 23 players 2
and 3 will choose (L, B) and that with probability 13 they will choose
(L, A). Given this belief, the action D that she takes is optimal, so that
player 2 knows that player 1 is rational.
   Player 3 knows that player 1’s information is {δ, } and that player 2’s
information is {γ, δ}. Thus, as argued above, player 3 knows that
players 1 and 2 are rational.
   In the three states γ, δ, and , player 3’s belief is that the pair of
actions of players 1 and 2 is (D, L), and thus in the state δ players 1
and 2 know player 3’s belief. They also know she is rational since her
payoffs are always zero.
   However in the state δ the beliefs do not define a Nash equilibrium.
In fact, the players’ beliefs about each other’s behavior do not even
coincide: Player 1 believes that player 3 chooses A with probability 31
80                                     Chapter 5. Knowledge and Equilibrium



while player 2 believes that she does so with probability 23 . Neither of
these beliefs together with the actions D and L forms a mixed strategy
Nash equilibrium of the game.
   What makes this example work is that in state δ player 1 does not
know that player 2 knows her belief: player 1 thinks that the state
might be , in which player 2 does not know whether player 1 believes
that player 3 plays B or that player 3 plays B with probability 32 and A
with probability 13 .
   Aumann and Brandenburger (1995) show that if all players share a
common prior and in some state rationality is mutual knowledge and
the players’ beliefs are common knowledge then the beliefs at that state
form a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium even if there are more than two
players. The key point is that if the beliefs of players 1 and 2 about
player 3’s action are common knowledge and if all the players share the
same prior, then the beliefs must be the same (by an argument like that
in the proof of Proposition 75.1).
   The following result formalizes the arguments in Chapter 4 to the
effect that the notion of rationalizability rests on weaker assumptions
about the players’ knowledge than that of Nash equilibrium, requiring
only that it be common knowledge among the players that all players
are rational. (The result does not depend essentially on the assumption
that there are two players, though the statement is simpler in this case.)
Proposition 80.1 Suppose that |N | = 2 and that in the state ω ∈ Ω
it is common knowledge between the players that each player’s belief is
consistent with his knowledge and that each player is rational. That is,
suppose that there is a self-evident event F 3 ω such that for every
ω 0 ∈ F and each i ∈ N
a. the support of µi (ω 0 ) is a subset of {aj (ω 00 ) ∈ Aj : ω 00 ∈ Pi (ω 0 )} for
   j 6= i;
b. the action ai (ω 0 ) is a best response of player i to µi (ω 0 ).
Then for each i ∈ N the action ai (ω) is rationalizable in G.
Proof. For each i ∈ N let Zi = {ai (ω 0 ) ∈ Ai : ω 0 ∈ F }. By (b) we know
that for any ω 0 ∈ F the action ai (ω 0 ) is a best response to µi (ω 0 ), whose
support, by (a), is a subset of {aj (ω 00 ) ∈ Aj : ω 00 ∈ Pi (ω 0 )}. Since F is
self-evident we have Pi (ω 0 ) ⊆ F , and thus {aj (ω 00 ) ∈ Aj : ω 00 ∈ Pi (ω 0 )} ⊆
Zj . Hence (using Definition 55.1) ai (ω) is rationalizable.                       2
  The three results in this section derive implications for the players’
actions or beliefs in a particular state from assumptions about their
 5.5 The Electronic Mail Game                                                81



                    A        B                      A         B

             A    M, M     1, −L             A      0, 0    1, −L

            B     −L, 1     0, 0             B    −L, 1     M, M

            Ga (probability 1 − p)             Gb (probability p)
 Figure 81.1 The component games of the Electronic Mail game. The parameters
 satisfy L > M > 1 and p < 12 .


 knowledge in that state. The result in the following exercise is based
 on an assumption of a different type—that in every state the players’
 rationality is common knowledge. If this assumption is satisfied and the
 players’ beliefs are derived from a common prior then the distribution
 of the players’ actions over Ω is a correlated equilibrium.
? Exercise 81.1     Suppose that for all ω ∈ Ω all players are rational (and
 hence their rationality is common knowledge in every state, since any
 fact that is true in all states is common knowledge in every state). Show
 that if each player’s belief in every state is derived from a common prior
 ρ on Ω for which ρ(Pi (ω)) > 0 for all i ∈ N and all ω ∈ Ω, and ai (ω 0 ) =
 ai (ω) for each i ∈ N and each ω 0 ∈ Pi (ω), then h(Ω, ρ), (Pi ), (ai )i, where
 Pi is the partition induced by Pi , is a correlated equilibrium of G. (The
 proof is very simple; the main task is to understand the content of the
 result.)

 5.5   The Electronic Mail Game

 In this section we study a game that illustrates the concepts introduced
 in this chapter. Each of two players has to choose one of the actions
 A or B. With probability p < 21 the game in which the players are
 involved is Gb ; with probability 1 − p it is Ga . In both Ga and Gb it
 is mutually beneficial for the players to choose the same action, but the
 action that is best depends on the game: in Ga the outcome (A, A) is
 best, while in game Gb the outcome (B, B) is best. The payoffs are
 shown in Figure 81.1, where L > M > 1. Note that even if a player is
 sure that the game is Gb , it is risky for him to choose B unless he is
 sufficiently confident that his partner is going to choose B as well.
    Which is the true game is known initially only to player 1. Assume
 first that player 2 cannot obtain this information. Then we can model
82                                   Chapter 5. Knowledge and Equilibrium



the situation as a Bayesian game (Definition 25.1) in which there are
two states a and b and the information structures induced by the signal
functions are {{a}, {b}} for player 1 and {{a, b}} for player 2. This game
has a unique Nash equilibrium, in which both players always choose A;
the expected payoff of each player is (1 − p)M .
   Now assume that player 1 can communicate with player 2 in such a
way that the game becomes common knowledge between the two players.
In this case each player’s information structure is {{a}, {b}} and the
(degenerate) Bayesian game has a Nash equilibrium in which each player
chooses A in state a and B in state b; the payoff of each player is M .
   In the situation we study in this section, the players can communi-
cate, but the means that is open to them does not allow the game to
become common knowledge. Specifically, the players are restricted to
communicate via computers under the following protocol. If the game is
Gb then player 1’s computer automatically sends a message to player 2’s
computer; if the game is Ga then no message is sent. If a computer
receives a message then it automatically sends a confirmation; this is
so not only for the original message but also for the confirmation, the
confirmation of the confirmation, and so on. The protocol is designed to
send confirmations because the technology has the property that there
is a small probability  > 0 that any given message does not arrive at its
intended destination. If a message does not arrive then the communica-
tion stops. At the end of the communication phase each player’s screen
displays the number of messages that his machine has sent.
   To discuss the players’ knowledge in this situation we need to specify
a set of states and the players’ information functions. Define the set of
states to be Ω = {(Q1 , Q2 ): Q1 = Q2 or Q1 = Q2 +1}. In the state (q, q)
player 1’s computer sends q messages, all of which arrive at player 2’s
computer, and the qth message sent by player 2’s computer goes astray.
In the state (q+1, q) player 1’s computer sends q+1 messages, and all but
the last arrive at player 2’s computer. Player 1’s information function is
defined by P1 (q, q) = {(q, q), (q, q − 1)} if q ≥ 1 and P1 (0, 0) = {(0, 0)};
player 2’s information function is defined by P2 (q, q) = {(q, q), (q + 1, q)}
for all q. Denote by G(Q1 , Q2 ) the game that is played in the state
(Q1 , Q2 ); that is, G(0, 0) = Ga and G(Q1 , Q2 ) = Gb otherwise. Player 1
knows the game in all states. Player 2 knows the game in all states
except (0, 0) and (1, 0). In each of the states (1, 0) and (1, 1) player 1
knows that the game is Gb but does not know that player 2 knows it.
Similarly in each of the states (1, 1) and (2, 1) player 2 knows that the
game is Gb but does not know whether player 1 knows that player 2
5.5 The Electronic Mail Game                                                 83



knows that the game is Gb . And so on. In any state (q, q) or (q + 1, q)
the larger the value of q the more statements of the type “player i knows
that player j knows that player i knows that . . . the game is Gb ” are
correct, but in no state is it common knowledge that the game is Gb .
  If  is small then with high probability each player sees a very high
number on his screen. When player 1 sees “1” on her screen, she is not
sure whether player 2 knows that the game is Gb , and consequently may
hesitate to play B. But if the number on her screen is, for example,
17 then it seems to be “almost” common knowledge that the game is
Gb , and thus it may seem that she will adhere to the more desirable
equilibrium (B, B) of the game Gb . Her decision will depend on her
belief about what player 2 will do if the number on his screen is 16 or
17. In turn, player 2’s decision depends on his belief about what player 1
will do if the number on her screen is 16. And so on. To study these
considerations we now define the following Bayesian game, referred to
as the electronic mail game.
  •   The set of states is Ω = {(Q1 , Q2 ): Q1 = Q2 or Q1 = Q2 + 1}.
  •   The signal function τi of each player i is defined by τi (Q1 , Q2 ) = Qi .
  •   Each player’s belief on Ω is the same, derived from the technology
      (characterized by ) and the assumption that the game is Ga with
      probability 1 − p: pi (0, 0) = 1 − p, pi (q + 1, q) = p(1 − )2q , and
      pi (q + 1, q + 1) = p(1 − )2q+1 for any nonnegative integer q.
  •   In each state (Q1 , Q2 ) the payoffs are determined by the game
      G(Q1 , Q2 ).

Proposition 83.1 The electronic mail game has a unique Nash equi-
librium, in which both players always choose A.
Proof. In the state (0, 0) the action A is strictly dominant for player 1,
so that in any Nash equilibrium player 1 chooses A when receiving the
signal 0. If player 2 gets no message (i.e. his signal is 0) then he knows
that either player 1 did not send a message (an event with probability
1 − p) or the message that player 1 sent did not arrive (an event with
probability p). If player 2 chooses A then, since player 1 chooses A in the
state (0, 0), player 2’s expected payoff is at least (1 − p)M/[(1 − p) + p]
whatever player 1 chooses in the state (1, 0); if player 2 chooses B then
his payoff is at most [−L(1 − p) + pM ]/[(1 − p) + p]. Therefore it is
strictly optimal for player 2 to choose A when his signal is 0.
   Assume now that we have shown that for all (Q1 , Q2 ) with Q1 + Q2 <
2q players 1 and 2 both choose A in any equilibrium. Consider player 1’s
84                                 Chapter 5. Knowledge and Equilibrium



decision when she sends q messages. In this case player 1 is uncertain
whether Q2 = q or Q2 = q − 1. Given that she did not receive a
confirmation of her qth message, the probability that she assigns to
Q2 = q − 1 is z = /[ + (1 − )] > 21 . Thus she believes that it is
more likely that her last message did not arrive than that player 2 got
the message. (This is the key point in the argument.) If she chooses
B then her expected payoff is at most z(−L) + (1 − z)M (since under
the induction assumption, she knows that if Q2 = q − 1 then player 2
chooses A). If she chooses A then her payoff is at least 0. Given that
L > M and z > 21 , her best action is thus A. By a similar argument, if
players 1 and 2 both choose A in any equilibrium for all (Q1 , Q2 ) with
Q1 + Q2 < 2q + 1 then player 2 chooses A when his signal is q. Hence
each player chooses A in response to every possible signal.            2
   Thus even if both players know that the game is Gb and even if the
noise in the network (the probability ) is arbitrarily small, the players
act as if they had no information and play A, as they do in the absence
of an electronic mail system!
   What would you do if the number on your screen were 17? It is
hard to imagine that when L slightly exceeds M and  is small a player
who sees the number 17 on his screen will not choose B. The contrast
between our intuition and the game theoretic analysis makes the equilib-
rium paradoxical. In this respect the example joins a long list of games
(like the finitely repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma (see Proposition 155.1),
the chain-store game (see Section 6.5.1), and the centipede game (see
Section 6.5.2)) in which it seems that the source of the discrepancy be-
tween our intuition and the analysis lies in the fact that mathematical
induction is not part of the reasoning process of human beings.


Notes

The basic model of knowledge described in Section 5.1 was formulated
in the 1950s and 1960s; Hintikka (1962) is seminal. The concept of
common knowledge is due to Lewis (1969) and Aumann (1976). Lewis
gives an informal definition (and discusses the philosophical background
for Sections 5.1 and 5.2); Aumann gives a formal definition and proves
Proposition 75.1. Section 5.4 is based on Brandenburger (1992) and
Aumann and Brandenburger (1995). (Spohn (1982) contains a result
that is a precursor to Proposition 78.1.) The electronic mail game of
Section 5.5 is studied by Rubinstein (1989); it is close in spirit to the
Notes                                                               85



“coordinated attack problem” studied by computer scientists (see, for
example, Halpern (1986)).
  The origin of the puzzle of the hats in Section 5.1.3 is unclear; see
Littlewood (1953, p. 3). Exercise 76.2 is based on Milgrom and Sto-
key (1982) and Exercise 81.1 is based on Aumann (1987a).
  For discussions of models of interactive knowledge in which the play-
ers’ information functions are not partitional see Bacharach (1985) and
Samet (1990). For surveys of the literature see Binmore and Branden-
burger (1990) and Geanakoplos (1992, 1994).
II         Extensive Games with Perfect Information




An extensive game is an explicit description of the sequential structure of
the decision problems encountered by the players in a strategic situation.
The model allows us to study solutions in which each player can consider
his plan of action not only at the beginning of the game but also at any
point of time at which he has to make a decision. By contrast, the
model of a strategic game restricts us to solutions in which each player
chooses his plan of action once and for all; this plan can cover unlimited
contingencies, but the model of a strategic game does not allow a player
to reconsider his plan of action after some events in the game have
unfolded.
   A general model of an extensive game allows each player, when making
his choices, to be imperfectly informed about what has happened in the
past. We study such a model in Part III. In this part we investigate a
simpler model in which each player is perfectly informed about the play-
ers’ previous actions at each point in the game. In Chapter 6 we describe
the basic model. In the next three chapters we study two interesting
classes of extensive games with perfect information: bargaining games
of alternating offers (Chapter 7) and repeated games (Chapters 8 and
9). In Chapter 10 we present some of the main results of implementation
theory (using the models of both strategic and extensive games).
  6              Extensive Games with Perfect Information




  In this chapter we study the model of an extensive game with perfect
  information. We argue that the solution concept of Nash equilibrium
  is unsatisfactory in this model since it ignores the sequential structure
  of the decision problems. We define the alternative notion of subgame
  perfect equilibrium, in which a player is required to reassess his plans
  as play proceeds. At the end of the chapter we compare this solution
  concept with that of iterated elimination of weakly dominated actions.

  6.1        Extensive Games with Perfect Information

  6.1.1       Definition
  An extensive game is a detailed description of the sequential structure of
  the decision problems encountered by the players in a strategic situation.
  There is perfect information in such a game if each player, when making
  any decision, is perfectly informed of all the events that have previously
  occurred. For simplicity we initially restrict attention to games in which
  no two players make decisions at the same time and all relevant moves
  are made by the players (no randomness ever intervenes). (We remove
  these two restrictions in Section 6.3.)
I Definition 89.1 An extensive game with perfect information
  has the following components.
   •    A set N (the set of players).
   •    A set H of sequences (finite or infinite) that satisfies the following
        three properties.
         ◦   The empty sequence ∅ is a member of H.
90                      Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information


      ◦   If (ak )k=1,...,K ∈ H (where K may be infinite) and L < K then
          (ak )k=1,...,L ∈ H.
      ◦   If an infinite sequence (ak )∞               k
                                       k=1 satisfies (a )k=1,...,L ∈ H for every
          positive integer L then (ak )∞k=1 ∈ H.
     (Each member of H is a history; each component of a history is an
     action taken by a player.) A history (ak )k=1,...,K ∈ H is terminal
     if it is infinite or if there is no aK+1 such that (ak )k=1,...,K+1 ∈ H.
     The set of terminal histories is denoted Z.
 •   A function P that assigns to each nonterminal history (each member
     of H \ Z) a member of N . (P is the player function, P (h) being
     the player who takes an action after the history h.)
 •   For each player i ∈ N a preference relation %i on Z (the preference
     relation of player i).
Sometimes it is convenient to specify the structure of an extensive game
without specifying the players’ preferences. We refer to a triple hN, H, P i
whose components satisfy the first three conditions in the definition as
an extensive game form with perfect information.
   If the set H of possible histories is finite then the game is finite. If
the longest history is finite then the game has a finite horizon. Let h
be a history of length k; we denote by (h, a) the history of length k + 1
consisting of h followed by a.
   Throughout this chapter we refer to an extensive game with perfect
information simply as an “extensive game”. We interpret such a game as
follows. After any nonterminal history h player P (h) chooses an action
from the set
                         A(h) = {a: (h, a) ∈ H}.
The empty history is the starting point of the game; we sometimes
refer to it as the initial history. At this point player P (∅) chooses a
member of A(∅). For each possible choice a0 from this set player P (a0 )
subsequently chooses a member of the set A(a0 ); this choice determines
the next player to move, and so on. A history after which no more
choices have to be made is terminal. Note that a history may be an
infinite sequence of actions. Implicit in the definition of a history as a
sequence (rather than as a more complex mathematical object, like a
string of sequences) is the assumption that no action may be taken after
any infinite history, so that each such history is terminal. As in the case
of a strategic game we often specify the players’ preferences over terminal
histories by giving payoff functions that represent the preferences.
 6.1 Extensive Games with Perfect Information                                  91


                                        1
                                      bXXX
                    (2, 0)                   XXX (0, 2)
                              (1, 1)             XXX
          2 r
               
                                         r2                   XX Xr2
        y    @ n                  y      @ n                   y  @ n
               @                            @                        @
     r          @r             r             @r             r         @r
   2, 0          0, 0        1, 1             0, 0        0, 2         0, 0

 Figure 91.1 An extensive game that models the procedure for allocating two
 identical indivisible objects between two people described in Example 91.1.


 Example 91.1 Two people use the following procedure to share two de-
  sirable identical indivisible objects. One of them proposes an allocation,
  which the other then either accepts or rejects. In the event of rejection,
  neither person receives either of the objects. Each person cares only
  about the number of objects he obtains.
     An extensive game that models the individuals’ predicament is hN, H,
  P, (%i )i where
   •   N = {1, 2};
   •   H consists of the ten histories ∅, (2, 0), (1, 1), (0, 2), ((2, 0), y),
       ((2, 0), n), ((1, 1), y), ((1, 1), n), ((0, 2), y), ((0, 2), n);
   •   P (∅) = 1 and P (h) = 2 for every nonterminal history h 6= ∅.
   •   ((2, 0), y) 1 ((1, 1), y) 1 ((0, 2), y) ∼1 ((2, 0), n) ∼1 ((1, 1), n) ∼1
       ((0, 2), n) and ((0, 2), y) 2 ((1, 1), y) 2 ((2, 0), y) ∼2 ((0, 2), n) ∼2
       ((1, 1), n) ∼2 ((2, 0), n).
    A convenient representation of this game is shown in Figure 91.1.
 The small circle at the top of the diagram represents the initial history
 ∅ (the starting point of the game). The 1 above this circle indicates
 that P (∅) = 1 (player 1 makes the first move). The three line segments
 that emanate from the circle correspond to the three members of A(∅)
 (the possible actions of player 1 at the initial history); the labels beside
 these line segments are the names of the actions, (k, 2 − k) being the
 proposal to give k of the objects to player 1 and the remaining 2 − k
 to player 2. Each line segment leads to a small disk beside which is
 the label 2, indicating that player 2 takes an action after any history
 of length one. The labels beside the line segments that emanate from
 these disks are the names of player 2’s actions, y meaning “accept” and n
 meaning “reject”. The numbers below the terminal histories are payoffs
 that represent the players’ preferences. (The first number in each pair
 is the payoff of player 1 and the second is the payoff of player 2.)
  92                    Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information



    Figure 91.1 suggests an alternative definition of an extensive game
  in which the basic component is a tree (a connected graph with no
  cycles). In this formulation each node corresponds to a history and any
  pair of nodes that are connected corresponds to an action; the names
  of the actions are not part of the definition. This definition is more
  conventional, but we find Definition 89.1, which takes the players’ actions
  as primitives, to be more natural.

  6.1.2   Strategies
  A strategy of a player in an extensive game is a plan that specifies the
  action chosen by the player for every history after which it is his turn
  to move.
I Definition 92.1 A strategy of player i ∈ N in an extensive game
  with perfect information hN, H, P, (%i )i is a function that assigns an
  action in A(h) to each nonterminal history h ∈ H \Z for which P (h) = i.
  Note that the notion of a strategy of a player in a game hN, H, P, (%i )i
  depends only on the game form hN, H, P i.
     To illustrate the notion of a strategy consider the game in Figure 91.1.
  Player 1 takes an action only after the initial history ∅, so that we can
  identify each of her strategies with one of the three possible actions that
  she can take after this history: (2, 0), (1, 1), and (0, 2). Player 2 takes
  an action after each of the three histories (2, 0), (1, 1), and (0, 2), and in
  each case he has two possible actions. Thus we can identify each of his
  strategies with a triple a2 b2 c2 where a2 , b2 , and c2 are the actions that
  he chooses after the histories (2, 0), (1, 1), and (0, 2). The interpretation
  of player 2’s strategy a2 b2 c2 is that it is a contingency plan: if player 1
  chooses (2, 0) then player 2 will choose a2 ; if player 1 chooses (1, 1) then
  player 2 will choose b2 ; and if player 1 chooses (0, 2) then player 2 will
  choose c2 .
     The game in Figure 93.1 illustrates an important point: a strategy
  specifies the action chosen by a player for every history after which it
  is his turn to move, even for histories that, if the strategy is followed,
  are never reached. In this game player 1 has four strategies AE, AF,
  BE, and BF . That is, her strategy specifies an action after the history
  (A, C) even if it specifies that she chooses B at the beginning of the
  game. In this sense a strategy differs from what we would naturally
  consider to be a plan of action; we return to this point in Section 6.4.
  As we shall see in a moment, for some purposes we can regard BE and
  6.1 Extensive Games with Perfect Information                                 93


                                          1b
                                           A
                                           @ B
                                    2r        @r
                                             @

                                 C   @  D      d
                                       @
                              1r        @r
                            E  @   F      c
                                  @
                          r        @r
                          a          b

  Figure 93.1 An extensive game in which player 1 moves both before and after
  player 2.


  BF as the same strategy; however, in other cases it is important to keep
  them distinct.
     For each strategy profile s = (si )i∈N in the extensive game hN, H, P,
  (%i )i we define the outcome O(s) of s to be the terminal history that
  results when each player i ∈ N follows the precepts of si . That is, O(s) is
  the (possibly infinite) history (a1 , . . . , aK ) ∈ Z such that for 0 ≤ k < K
  we have sP (a1 ,...,ak ) (a1 , . . . , ak ) = ak+1 .
     As in a strategic game we can define a mixed strategy to be a probabil-
  ity distribution over the set of (pure) strategies. In extensive games with
  perfect information little is added by considering such strategies. Thus
  we postpone discussing them until Chapter 11, where we study extensive
  games in which the players are not perfectly informed when taking ac-
  tions; in such games the notion of a mixed strategy has more significance.

  6.1.3   Nash Equilibrium
  The first solution concept we define for an extensive game ignores the
  sequential structure of the game; it treats the strategies as choices that
  are made once and for all before play begins.
I Definition 93.1 A Nash equilibrium of an extensive game with
  perfect information hN, H, P, (%i )i is a strategy profile s∗ such that
  for every player i ∈ N we have

          O(s∗−i , s∗i ) %i O(s∗−i , si ) for every strategy si of player i.

     Alternatively, we can define a Nash equilibrium of an extensive game
  Γ as a Nash equilibrium of the strategic game derived from Γ defined as
  follows.
  94                      Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information



I Definition 94.1 The strategic form of the extensive game with
  perfect information Γ = hN, H, P, (%i )i is the strategic game hN, (Si ),
  (%0i )i in which for each player i ∈ N
    •   Si is the set of strategies of player i in Γ
    •   %0i is defined by s %0i s0 if and only if O(s) %i O(s0 ) for every s ∈
        ×i∈N Si and s0 ∈ ×i∈N Si .
? Exercise 94.2     Let G be a two-player strategic game h{1, 2}, (Ai ), (%i )i
  in which each player has two actions: Ai = {a0i , a00i } for i = 1, 2. Show
  that G is the strategic form of an extensive game with perfect informa-
  tion if and only if either for some a1 ∈ A1 we have (a1 , a02 ) ∼i (a1 , a002 )
  for i = 1, 2 or for some a2 ∈ A2 we have (a01 , a2 ) ∼i (a001 , a2 ) for i = 1, 2.
     If Nash equilibrium were the only solution we defined for extensive
  games, we could define a strategy more restrictively than we have done
  so: we could require that a strategy specify a player’s action only after
  histories that are not inconsistent with the actions that it specifies at
  earlier points in the game. This is so because the outcome O(s) of the
  strategy profile s is not affected by the actions that the strategy si of
  any player i specifies after contingencies that are inconsistent with si .
  Precisely, we can define a reduced strategy of player i to be a function
  fi whose domain is a subset of {h ∈ H: P (h) = i} and has the following
  properties: (i ) it associates with every history h in the domain of fi an
  action in A(h) and (ii ) a history h with P (h) = i is in the domain of fi
  if and only if all the actions of player i in h are those dictated by fi (that
  is, if h = (ak ) and h0 = (ak )k=1,...,L is a subsequence of h with P (h0 ) = i
  then fi (h0 ) = aL+1 ). Each reduced strategy of player i corresponds to
  a set of strategies of player i; for each vector of strategies of the other
  players each strategy in this set yields the same outcome (that is, the
  strategies in the set are outcome-equivalent). The set of Nash equilibria
  of an extensive game corresponds to the Nash equilibria of the strategic
  game in which the set of actions of each player is the set of his reduced
  strategies. (The full definition of a strategy is needed for the concept of
  subgame perfect equilibrium, which we define in the next section.)
     As an example of the set of reduced strategies of a player in an exten-
  sive game, consider the game in Figure 93.1. Player 1 has three reduced
  strategies: one defined by fi (∅) = B (with domain {∅}), one defined
  by fi (∅) = A and fi (A, C) = E (with domain {∅, (A, C)}), and one
  defined by fi (∅) = A and fi (A, C) = F (with domain {∅, (A, C)}).
     For some games some of a player’s reduced strategies are equivalent
  in the sense that, regardless of the strategies of the other players, they
  6.1 Extensive Games with Perfect Information                               95



  generate the same payoffs for all players (though not the same outcome).
  That is, for some games there is a redundancy in the definition of a
  strategy, from the point of view of the players’ payoffs, beyond that
  captured by the notion of a reduced strategy. For example, if a = b in
  the game in Figure 93.1 then player 1’s two reduced strategies in which
  she chooses A at the start of the game are equivalent from the point of
  view of payoffs. To capture this further redundancy, together with the
  redundancy captured by the notion of a reduced strategy, we can define
  the following variant of the strategic form.
I Definition 95.1 Let Γ = hN, H, P, (%i )i be an extensive game with
  perfect information and let hN, (Si ), (%0i )i be its strategic form. For any
  i ∈ N define the strategies si ∈ Si and s0i ∈ Si of player i to be equivalent
  if for each s−i ∈ S−i we have (s−i , si ) ∼0j (s−i , s0i ) for all j ∈ N . The
  reduced strategic form of Γ is the strategic game hN, (Si0 ), (%00i )i in
  which for each i ∈ N each set Si0 contains one member of each set of
  equivalent strategies in Si and %00i is the preference ordering over ×j∈N Sj0
  induced by %0i .
  (Note that this definition specifies the names of the actions in the re-
  duced strategic form; every choice of such actions defines a different
  reduced strategic form. However, the names of the actions do not mat-
  ter in any conventional game theoretic analysis, so that we refer to the
  reduced strategic form of a game.)
    The strategic and reduced strategic forms of the game in Figure 93.1
  are shown in Figure 96.1. If a = b then the strategies AE and AF of
  player 1 are equivalent, so that player 1 has only two actions in the
  reduced strategic form of the game.
    The next example illustrates the notion of Nash equilibrium and points
  to an undesirable feature that equilibria may possess.
 Example 95.2 The game in Figure 96.2 has two Nash equilibria: (A, R)
  and (B, L), with payoff profiles (2, 1) and (1, 2). The strategy profile
  (B, L) is a Nash equilibrium because given that player 2 chooses L after
  the history A, it is optimal for player 1 to choose B at the start of the
  game (if she chooses A instead, then given player 2’s choice she obtains 0
  rather than 1), and given player 1’s choice of B it is optimal for player 2
  to choose L (since his choice makes no difference to the outcome).
    Our interpretation of a nonterminal history as a point at which a
  player may reassess his plan of action leads to an argument that the
  Nash equilibrium (B, L) in this game lacks plausibility. If the history A
  96                     Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information



                              C    D
                                                      C    D
                       AE     a     c
                                               AE     a     c
                       AF      b    c
                                               AF      b    c
                       BE     d     d
                                                 B    d     d
                       BF     d     d

  Figure 96.1 The strategic form (left) and reduced strategic form (right) of the
  extensive game in Figure 93.1.


                                           1b
                                       A    @ B
                                    2r          @r
                                               @

                                  L  @ R         1, 2
                                        @
                                r        @r
                              0, 0        2, 1

              Figure 96.2 An example of a two-player extensive game.


  were to occur then player 2 would, it seems, choose R over L, since he
  obtains a higher payoff by doing so. The equilibrium (B, L) is sustained
  by the “threat” of player 2 to choose L if player 1 chooses A. This
  threat is not credible since player 2 has no way of committing himself to
  this choice. Thus player 1 can be confident that if she chooses A then
  player 2 will choose R; since she prefers the outcome (A, R) to the Nash
  equilibrium outcome (B, L), she thus has an incentive to deviate from
  the equilibrium and choose A. In the next section we define a notion of
  equilibrium that captures these considerations.
 Example 96.1 The Nash equilibria of the game in Figure 91.1 are
  ((2, 0), yyy), ((2, 0), yyn), ((2, 0), yny), ((2, 0), ynn), ((1, 1), nyy), ((1, 1),
  nyn), ((0, 2), nny), ((2, 0), nny), and ((2, 0), nnn). The first four result
  in the division (2, 0), the next two result in the division (1, 1), the next
  one results in the division (0, 2), and the last two result in the division
  (0, 0). All of these equilibria except ((2, 0), yyy) and ((1, 1), nyy) involve
  an action of player 2 that is implausible after some history (since he
  rejects a proposal that gives him at least one of the objects); like the
  6.2 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium                                              97



  equilibrium (B, L) in Example 95.2, they are ruled out by the notion of
  equilibrium we now define.

  6.2    Subgame Perfect Equilibrium

  Motivated by the discussion at the end of the previous section we now
  define the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium. We begin by defining
  the notion of a subgame.
I Definition 97.1 The subgame of the extensive game with per-
  fect information Γ = hN, H, P, (%i )i that follows the history h
  is the extensive game Γ(h) = hN, H|h , P |h , (%i |h )i, where H|h is the
  set of sequences h0 of actions for which (h, h0 ) ∈ H, P |h is defined by
  P |h (h0 ) = P (h, h0 ) for each h0 ∈ H|h , and %i |h is defined by h0 %i |h h00
  if and only if (h, h0 ) %i (h, h00 ).
     The notion of equilibrium we now define requires that the action pre-
  scribed by each player’s strategy be optimal, given the other players’
  strategies, after every history. Given a strategy si of player i and a
  history h in the extensive game Γ, denote by si |h the strategy that si
  induces in the subgame Γ(h) (i.e. si |h (h0 ) = si (h, h0 ) for each h0 ∈ H|h );
  denote by Oh the outcome function of Γ(h).
I Definition 97.2 A subgame perfect equilibrium of an exten-
  sive game with perfect information Γ = hN, H, P, (%i )i is a strat-
  egy profile s∗ such that for every player i ∈ N and every nonterminal
  history h ∈ H \ Z for which P (h) = i we have

                        Oh (s∗−i |h , s∗i |h ) %i |h Oh (s∗−i |h , si )

  for every strategy si of player i in the subgame Γ(h).
     Equivalently, we can define a subgame perfect equilibrium to be a
  strategy profile s∗ in Γ for which for any history h the strategy profile
  s∗ |h is a Nash equilibrium of the subgame Γ(h).
     The notion of subgame perfect equilibrium eliminates Nash equilibria
  in which the players’ threats are not credible. For example, in the game
  in Figure 96.2 the only subgame perfect equilibrium is (A, R) and in the
  game in Figure 91.1 the only subgame perfect equilibria are ((2, 0), yyy)
  and ((1, 1), nyy).
 Example 97.3 (Stackelberg games) A Stackelberg game is a two-player
  extensive game with perfect information in which a “leader” chooses an
  action from a set A1 and a “follower”, informed of the leader’s choice,
 98                        Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information



 chooses an action from a set A2 . The solution usually applied to such
 games in economics is that of subgame perfect equilibrium (though this
 terminology is not always used). Some (but not all) subgame per-
 fect equilibria of a Stackelberg game correspond to solutions of the
 maximization problem
            max           u1 (a1 , a2 )    subject to a2 ∈ arg max u2 (a1 , a02 ),
       (a1 ,a2 )∈A1 ×A2                                            a02 ∈A2

 where ui is a payoff function that represents player i’s preferences. If
 the set Ai of actions of each player i is compact and the payoff functions
 ui are continuous then this maximization problem has a solution.
? Exercise 98.1   Give an example of a subgame perfect equilibrium
 of a Stackelberg game that does not correspond to a solution of the
 maximization problem above.
    To verify that a strategy profile s∗ is a subgame perfect equilibrium,
 Definition 97.2 requires us to check, for every player i and every subgame,
 that there is no strategy that leads to an outcome that player i prefers.
 The following result shows that in a game with a finite horizon we can
 restrict attention, for each player i and each subgame, to alternative
 strategies that differ from s∗i in the actions they prescribe after just one
 history. Specifically, a strategy profile is a subgame perfect equilibrium
 if and only if for each subgame the player who makes the first move
 cannot obtain a better outcome by changing only his initial action. For
 an extensive game Γ denote by `(Γ) the length of the longest history in
 Γ; we refer to `(Γ) as the length of Γ.
 Lemma 98.2 (The one deviation property) Let Γ = hN, H, P, (%i )i be
 a finite horizon extensive game with perfect information. The strategy
 profile s∗ is a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ if and only if for every
 player i ∈ N and every history h ∈ H for which P (h) = i we have
                          Oh (s∗−i |h , s∗i |h ) %i |h Oh (s∗−i |h , si )
 for every strategy si of player i in the subgame Γ(h) that differs from
 s∗i |h only in the action it prescribes after the initial history of Γ(h).
 Proof. If s∗ is a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ then it satisfies the
 condition. Now suppose that s∗ is not a subgame perfect equilibrium;
 suppose that player i can deviate profitably in the subgame Γ(h0 ). Then
 there exists a profitable deviant strategy si of player i in Γ(h0 ) for which
 si (h) 6= (s∗i |h0 )(h) for a number of histories h not larger than the length
 of Γ(h0 ); since Γ has a finite horizon this number is finite. From among
 6.2 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium                                            99



 all the profitable deviations of player i in Γ(h0 ) choose a strategy si for
 which the number of histories h such that si (h) 6= (s∗i |h0 )(h) is minimal.
 Let h∗ be the longest history h of Γ(h0 ) for which si (h) 6= (s∗i |h0 )(h).
 Then the initial history of Γ(h∗ ) is the only history in Γ(h∗ ) at which
 the action prescribed by si differs from that prescribed by s∗i |h0 . Further,
 si |h∗ is a profitable deviation in Γ(h∗ ), since otherwise there would be a
 profitable deviation in Γ(h0 ) that differs from s∗i |h0 after fewer histories
 than does si . Thus si |h∗ is a profitable deviation in Γ(h∗ ) that differs
 from s∗i |h∗ only in the action that it prescribes after the initial history
 of Γ(h∗ ).                                                                  2
? Exercise 99.1   Give an example of an infinite horizon game for which
 the one deviation property does not hold.
    We now prove that every finite extensive game with perfect informa-
 tion has a subgame perfect equilibrium. Our proof is constructive: for
 each of the longest nonterminal histories in the game we choose an op-
 timal action for the player whose turn it is to move and replace each
 of these histories with a terminal history in which the payoff profile is
 that which results when the optimal action is chosen; then we repeat
 the procedure, working our way back to the start of the game. (The
 following result is known as Kuhn’s theorem.)
 Proposition 99.2 Every finite extensive game with perfect information
 has a subgame perfect equilibrium.
 Proof. Let Γ = hN, H, P, (%i )i be a finite extensive game with perfect
 information. We construct a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ by induc-
 tion on `(Γ(h)); at the same time we define a function R that associates
 a terminal history with every history h ∈ H and show that this history
 is a subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of the subgame Γ(h).
     If `(Γ(h)) = 0 (i.e. h is a terminal history of Γ) define R(h) = h. Now
 suppose that R(h) is defined for all h ∈ H with `(Γ(h)) ≤ k for some
 k ≥ 0. Let h∗ be a history for which `(Γ(h∗ )) = k + 1 and let P (h∗ ) = i.
 Since `(Γ(h∗ )) = k + 1 we have `(Γ(h∗ , a)) ≤ k for all a ∈ A(h∗ ). Define
 si (h∗ ) to be a %i -maximizer of R(h∗ , a) over a ∈ A(h∗ ), and define
 R(h∗ ) = R(h∗ , si (h∗ )). By induction we have now defined a strategy
 profile s in Γ; by Lemma 98.2 this strategy profile is a subgame perfect
 equilibrium of Γ.                                                         2
   The procedure used in this proof is often referred to as backwards in-
 duction. In addition to being a means by which to prove the proposition,
 this procedure is an algorithm for calculating the set of subgame perfect
 100                  Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information



 equilibria of a finite game. Part of the appeal of the notion of subgame
 perfect equilibrium derives from the fact that the algorithm describes
 what appears to be a natural way for players to analyze such a game so
 long as the horizon is relatively short.
    One conclusion we may draw from the result relates to chess. Under
 the rule that a game is a draw once a position is repeated three times,
 chess is finite, so that Proposition 99.2 implies that it has a subgame
 perfect equilibrium and hence also a Nash equilibrium. (Under the (of-
 ficial) rule that a player has the option of declaring a draw under these
 circumstances, chess is not finite.) Because chess is strictly competitive,
 Proposition 22.2 implies that the equilibrium payoff is unique and that
 any Nash equilibrium strategy of a player guarantees the player his equi-
 librium payoff. Thus either White has a strategy that guarantees that
 it wins, or Black has a strategy that guarantees that it wins, or each
 player has a strategy that guarantees that the outcome of the game is
 either a win for it or a draw.
? Exercise 100.1    Show that the requirement in Kuhn’s theorem (Propo-
 sition 99.2) that the game be finite cannot be replaced by the require-
 ment that it have a finite horizon, nor by the requirement that after any
 history each player have finitely many possible actions.
    Note that Kuhn’s theorem makes no claim of uniqueness. Indeed, the
 game in Figure 91.1 has two subgame perfect equilibria ((2, 0), yyy) and
 ((1, 1), nyy)) that are not equivalent in terms of either player’s prefer-
 ences. However, it is clear that a finite game in which no player is indif-
 ferent between any two outcomes has a unique subgame perfect equilib-
 rium. Further, if all players are indifferent between any two outcomes
 whenever any one player is indifferent, then even though there may be
 more than one subgame perfect equilibrium, all players are indifferent
 between all subgame perfect equilibria. This result is demonstrated in
 the following exercise.
? Exercise 100.2     Say that a finite extensive game with perfect informa-
 tion satisfies the no indifference condition if

          z ∼j z 0 for all j ∈ N whenever z ∼i z 0 for some i ∈ N,

 where z and z 0 are terminal histories. Show, using induction on the
 length of subgames, that every player is indifferent among all subgame
 perfect equilibrium outcomes of such a game. Show also that if s and s0
 are subgame perfect equilibria then so is s00 , where for each player i the
 6.3 Two Extensions of the Definition of a Game                             101



 strategy s00i is equal to either si or s0i (that is, the equilibria of the game
 are interchangeable).
? Exercise 101.1   Show that a subgame perfect equilibrium of an exten-
 sive game Γ is also a subgame perfect equilibrium of the game obtained
 from Γ by deleting a subgame not reached in the equilibrium and assign-
 ing to the terminal history thus created the outcome of the equilibrium
 in the deleted subgame.
? Exercise 101.2     Let s be a strategy profile in an extensive game with
 perfect information Γ; suppose that P (h) = i, si (h) = a, and a0 ∈
 A(h) with a0 6= a. Consider the game Γ0 obtained from Γ by deleting
 all histories of the form (h, a0 , h0 ) for some sequence of actions h0 and
 let s0 be the strategy profile in Γ0 that is induced by s. Show that if
 s is a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ then s0 is a subgame perfect
 equilibrium of Γ0 .
? Exercise 101.3    Armies 1 and 2 are fighting over an island initially
 held by a battalion of army 2. Army 1 has K battalions and army 2
 has L. Whenever the island is occupied by one army the opposing army
 can launch an attack. The outcome of the attack is that the occupying
 battalion and one of the attacking battalions are destroyed; the attacking
 army wins and, so long as it has battalions left, occupies the island with
 one battalion. The commander of each army is interested in maximizing
 the number of surviving battalions but also regards the occupation of
 the island as worth more than one battalion but less than two. (If,
 after an attack, neither army has any battalions left, then the payoff of
 each commander is 0.) Analyze this situation as an extensive game and,
 using the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium, predict the winner as
 a function of K and L.

 6.3     Two Extensions of the Definition of a Game

 The model of an extensive game with perfect information, as given in
 Definition 89.1, can easily be extended in two directions.

 6.3.1    Exogenous Uncertainty
 First we extend the model to cover situations in which there is some
 exogenous uncertainty. An extensive game with perfect information and
 chance moves is a tuple hN, H, P, fc , (%i )i where, as before, N is a finite
 set of players and H is a set of histories, and
 102                    Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information


    •   P is a function from the nonterminal histories in H to N ∪ {c}.
        (If P (h) = c then chance determines the action taken after the
        history h.)
    •   For each h ∈ H with P (h) = c, fc (·|h) is a probability measure on
        A(h); each such probability measure is assumed to be independent
        of every other such measure. (fc (a|h) is the probability that a
        occurs after the history h.)
    •   For each player i ∈ N , %i is a preference relation on lotteries over
        the set of terminal histories.
 A strategy for each player i ∈ N is defined as before. The outcome of a
 strategy profile is a probability distribution over terminal histories. The
 definition of a subgame perfect equilibrium is the same as before (see
 Definition 97.2).
? Exercise 102.1   Show that both the one deviation property (Lemma
 98.2) and Kuhn’s theorem (Proposition 99.2) hold for an extensive game
 with perfect information and chance moves.

 6.3.2    Simultaneous Moves
 To model situations in which players move simultaneously after certain
 histories, each of them being fully informed of all past events when
 making his choice, we can modify the definition of an extensive game
 with perfect information (Definition 89.1) as follows. An extensive game
 with perfect information and simultaneous moves is a tuple hN, H, P,
 (%i )i where N , H, and %i for each i ∈ N are the same as in Defini-
 tion 89.1, P is a function that assigns to each nonterminal history a set
 of players, and H and P jointly satisfy the condition that for every non-
 terminal history h there is a collection {Ai (h)}i∈P (h) of sets for which
 A(h) = {a: (h, a) ∈ H} = ×i∈P (h) Ai (h).
    A history in such a game is a sequence of vectors; the components of
 each vector ak are the actions taken by the players whose turn it is to
 move after the history (a` )k−1
                              `=1 . The set of actions among which each
 player i ∈ P (h) can choose after the history h is Ai (h); the interpretation
 is that the choices of the players in P (h) are made simultaneously.
    A strategy of player i ∈ N in such a game is a function that assigns
 an action in Ai (h) to every nonterminal history h for which i ∈ P (h).
 The definition of a subgame perfect equilibrium is the same as that
 in Definition 97.2 with the exception that “P (h) = i” is replaced by
 “i ∈ P (h)”.
 6.4 The Interpretation of a Strategy                                   103



? Exercise 103.1    Suppose that three players share a pie by using the
 following procedure. First player 1 proposes a division, then players 2
 and 3 simultaneously respond either “yes” or “no”. If players 2 and
 3 both say “yes” then the division is implemented; otherwise no player
 receives anything. Each player prefers more of the pie to less. Formulate
 this situation as an extensive game with simultaneous moves and find
 its subgame perfect equilibria.
? Exercise 103.2   Consider the following two-player game. First player 1
 can choose either Stop or Continue. If she chooses Stop then the game
 ends with the pair of payoffs (1, 1). If she chooses Continue then the
 players simultaneously announce nonnegative integers and each player’s
 payoff is the product of the numbers. Formulate this situation as an
 extensive game with simultaneous moves and find its subgame perfect
 equilibria.
? Exercise 103.3   Show that the one deviation property (Lemma 98.2)
 holds for an extensive game with simultaneous moves but that Kuhn’s
 theorem (Proposition 99.2) does not.

 6.4   The Interpretation of a Strategy

 As we have noted, the definition of a strategy (92.1) does not correspond
 to a plan of action since it requires a player to specify his actions after
 histories that are impossible if he carries out his plan. For example, as
 we saw before, a strategy of player 1 in the game in Figure 104.1 specifies
 both the action she takes at the beginning of the game and the action
 she takes after the history (A, C), even if the action she takes at the
 beginning of the game is B.
    One interpretation for the components of a player’s strategy corre-
 sponding to histories that are not possible if the strategy is followed is
 that they are the beliefs of the other players about what the player will
 do in the event he does not follow his plan. For example, in the game in
 Figure 104.1, player 1’s action after the history (A, C) can be thought
 of as player 2’s belief about the choice that player 1 will make after
 this history, a belief that player 2 needs to hold in order to rationally
 choose an action. If player 1 plans to choose A then player 2’s belief co-
 incides with player 1’s planned action after the history (A, C). However,
 if player 1 plans to choose B then such a belief cannot be derived from
 player 1’s plan of action. In this case player 1’s strategy nevertheless
 supplies such a belief. Note that the belief of player 2 about player 1 is
104                  Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information


                                          1b
                                       A   @ B
                                  2r           @r
                                              @

                               C    @   D       2, 1
                                       @
                            1r          @r
                          E  @   F       0, 1
                                @
                        r        @r
                      0, 0        1, 2

Figure 104.1 An extensive game in which player 1 moves both before and after
player 2.


relevant to the analysis of the game even if player 1 plans to choose B,
since to rationalize the choice of B player 1 needs to form a belief about
player 2’s plan after the history A.
   This interpretation has a number of implications. First, it becomes
problematic to speak of the “choice of a strategy”, since a player does
not choose the other players’ beliefs. Second, in any equilibrium of a
game with more than two players there is an implicit assumption that
all the players other than any given player i hold the same beliefs about
player i’s behavior, not only if he follows his plan of action but also if he
deviates from this plan. Third, one has to be careful if one imposes con-
straints on the strategies since one is then making assumptions not only
about the players’ plans of action, but also about their beliefs regarding
each others’ intentions when these plans of action are violated.
   This interpretation of a strategy also diminishes the attraction of
the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium. Consider again the game
in Figure 104.1. There is no way, within the structure of the game,
for player 2 to rationalize a choice of A by player 1 (since player 1
prefers the history B to every history that can result when she chooses
A). Thus if she observes that player 1 chooses A, player 2 must give
up a basic assumption about the game: she must believe either that
player 1 is not rational, that player 1 perceives the game to differ from
that in Figure 104.1, or that player 1 chose A by “mistake” (although
such mistakes are not envisaged in the specification of the game). Yet
the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium requires that, whatever his-
tory he observes, player 2 continue to maintain his original assump-
tions that player 1 is rational, knows the game, and does not make
mistakes.
6.5 Two Notable Finite Horizon Games                                             105


                                          kb
                                      In   @ Out
                                  CS r         @r
                                              @

                                F    @  C       5, 1
                                       @
                              r         @r
                            0, 0         2, 2

Figure 105.1 The structure of the players’ choices in city k in the chain-store game.
The first number in each pair is the chain-store’s payoff and the second number is
player k’s payoff.


6.5     Two Notable Finite Horizon Games

In this section we demonstrate some of the strengths and weaknesses
of the concept of subgame perfect equilibrium by examining two well-
known games. It is convenient to describe each of these games by in-
troducing a variable time that is discrete and starts at period 1. This
variable is not an addition to the formal model of an extensive game; it
is merely a device to simplify the description of the games and highlight
their structures.

6.5.1   The Chain-Store Game
A chain-store (player CS ) has branches in K cities, numbered 1, . . . , K.
In each city k there is a single potential competitor, player k. In each
period one of the potential competitors decides whether or not to com-
pete with player CS ; in period k it is player k’s turn to do so. If player k
decides to compete then the chain-store can either fight (F ) or cooperate
(C). The chain-store responds to player k’s decision before player k + 1
makes its decision. Thus in period k the set of possible outcomes is
Q = {Out, (In, C), (In, F )}. If challenged in any given city the chain-
store prefers to cooperate rather than fight, but obtains the highest pay-
off if there is no entry. Each potential competitor is better off staying
out than entering and being fought, but obtains the highest payoff when
it enters and the chain-store is cooperative. The structure of the play-
ers’ choices and their considerations in a single period are summarized
in Figure 105.1.
   Two assumptions complete the description of the game. First, at every
point in the game all players know all the actions previously chosen.
This allows us to model the situation as an extensive game with perfect
106                  Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information


                                                                  K−1
information, in which the set of histories is (∪K          k
                                                     k=0 Q ) ∪ (∪k=0 (Q ×
                                                                         k
                 k
{In})), where Q is the set of all sequences of k members of Q, and the
player function is given by P (h) = k + 1 if h ∈ Qk and P (h) = CS if
h ∈ Qk ×{In}, for k = 0, . . . , K −1. Second, the payoff of the chain-store
in the game is the sum of its payoffs in the K cities.
   The game has a multitude of Nash equilibria: every terminal history in
which the outcome in any period is either Out or (In, C) is the outcome
of a Nash equilibrium. (In any equilibrium in which player k chooses Out
the chain-store’s strategy specifies that it will fight if player k enters.)
   In contrast, the game has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium; in
this equilibrium every challenger chooses In and the chain-store always
chooses C. (In city K the chain-store must choose C, regardless of
the history, so that in city K − 1 it must do the same; continuing the
argument one sees that the chain-store must always choose C.)
   For small values of K the Nash equilibria that are not subgame per-
fect are intuitively unappealing while the subgame perfect equilibrium
is appealing. However, when K is large the subgame perfect equilibrium
loses some of its appeal. The strategy of the chain-store in this equi-
librium dictates that it cooperate with every entrant, regardless of its
past behavior. Given our interpretation of a strategy (see the previous
section), this means that even a challenger who has observed the chain-
store fight with many entrants still believes that the chain-store will
cooperate with it. Although the chain-store’s unique subgame perfect
equilibrium strategy does indeed specify that it cooperate with every
entrant, it seems more reasonable for a competitor who has observed
the chain-store fight repeatedly to believe that its entry will be met
with an aggressive response, especially if there are many cities still to
be contested. If a challenger enters then it is in the myopic interest of
the chain-store to be cooperative, but intuition suggests that it may be
in its long-term interest to build a reputation for aggressive behavior, in
order to deter future entry. In Section 12.3.2 we study a perturbation of
the chain-store game, in which the challengers are imperfectly informed
about the motives of the chain-store, that attempts to capture this idea.

6.5.2   The Centipede Game
Two players are involved in a process that they alternately have the
opportunity to stop. Each prefers the outcome when he stops the process
in any period t to that in which the other player does so in period t + 1.
However, better still is any outcome that can result if the process is not
6.5 Two Notable Finite Horizon Games                                      107


                 1b C 2r C 1r C 2r C 1r C 2r C            r 6, 5
             S       S      S      S      S      S
                r      r      r      r      r      r
              1, 0   0, 2   3, 1   2, 4   5, 3   4, 6

           Figure 107.1 A six-period version of the centipede game.


stopped in either of these periods. After T periods, where T is even, the
process ends. For T = 6 the game is shown in Figure 107.1. (The name
“centipede” comes from the shape of the diagram.)
   Formally, the set of histories in the game consists of all sequences
C(t) = (C, . . . , C) of length t, for 0 ≤ t ≤ T , and all sequences S(t) =
(C, . . . , C, S) consisting of t − 1 repetitions of C followed by a single S,
for 1 ≤ t ≤ T . The player function is defined by P (C(t)) = 1 if t is
even and t ≤ T − 2 and P (C(t)) = 2 if t is odd. Player P (C(t)) prefers
S(t + 3) to S(t + 1) to S(t + 2) for t ≤ T − 3, player 1 prefers C(T ) to
S(T − 1) to S(T ), and player 2 prefers S(T ) to C(T ).
   The game has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium; in this equi-
librium each player chooses S in every period. The outcome of this
equilibrium is the same as the outcome of every Nash equilibrium. To
see this, first note that there is no equilibrium in which the outcome
is C(T ). Now assume that there is a Nash equilibrium that ends with
player i choosing S in period t (i.e. after the history C(t − 1)). If t ≥ 2
then player j can increase his payoff by choosing S in period t−1. Hence
in any equilibrium player 1 chooses S in the first period. In order for
this to be optimal for player 1, player 2 must choose S in period 2. The
notion of Nash equilibrium imposes no restriction on the players’ choices
in later periods: any pair of strategies in which player 1 chooses S in
period 1 and player 2 chooses S in period 2 is a Nash equilibrium. (Note
however that the reduced strategic form of the game has a unique Nash
equilibrium.)
   In the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of this game each player
believes that the other player will stop the game at the next opportu-
nity, even after a history in which that player has chosen to continue
many times in the past. As in the subgame perfect equilibrium of the
chain-store game such a belief is not intuitively appealing; unless T is
very small it seems unlikely that player 1 would immediately choose S
at the start of the game. The intuition in the centipede game is slightly
different from that in the chain-store game in that after any long his-
 108                  Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information



 tory both players have repeatedly violated the precepts of rationality
 enshrined in the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium. After a history
 in which both a player and his opponent have chosen to continue many
 times in the past, the basis on which the player should form a belief
 about his opponent’s action in the next period is far from clear.
? Exercise 108.1     For any  > 0 define an -equilibrium of a strategic
 game to be a profile of actions with the property that no player has
 an alternative action that increases his payoff by more than . Show
 that for any positive integer k and any  > 0 there is a horizon T long
 enough that the strategic form of the modification of the centipede game
 in which all payoffs are divided by T has an -equilibrium in which the
 first player to stop the game does so in period k.

 6.6     Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Strategies

 6.6.1    Relation with Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
 In Section 4.3 we define the procedure of iterated elimination of weakly
 dominated actions for a strategic game and argue that though it is less
 appealing than the procedure of iterated elimination of strictly domi-
 nated actions (since a weakly dominated action is a best response to
 some belief), it is a natural method for a player to use to simplify a
 game. In the proof of Kuhn’s theorem (Proposition 99.2) we define the
 procedure of backwards induction for finite extensive games with perfect
 information and show that it yields the set of subgame perfect equilibria
 of the game.
    The two procedures are related. Let Γ be a finite extensive game with
 perfect information in which no player is indifferent between any two
 terminal histories. Then Γ has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium.
 We now define a sequence for eliminating weakly dominated actions in
 the strategic form G of Γ (weakly dominated strategies in Γ) with the
 property that all the action profiles of G that remain at the end of the
 procedure generate the unique subgame perfect equilibrium outcome
 of Γ.
    Let h be a history of Γ with P (h) = i and `(Γ(h)) = 1 and let
 a∗i ∈ A(h) be the unique action selected by the procedure of back-
 wards induction for the history h. Backwards induction eliminates ev-
 ery strategy of player i that chooses an action different from a∗i after
 the history h. Among these strategies, those consistent with h (i.e. that
 choose the component of h that follows h0 whenever h0 is a subhistory of
6.6 Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Strategies                           109



                                                                C      D
                           1b
                       A    @ B                         AE     2, 0    1, 1
                   2r           @r
                               @

                C    @ D         3, 3                   AF     0, 2    1, 1
                        @
             1r          @r
           E  @ F         1, 1                          BE     3, 3    3, 3
                 @
         r        @r
       2, 0        0, 2                                 BF     3, 3    3, 3

Figure 109.1 An extensive game (left) and its strategic form (right). There is an
order of elimination of weakly dominated actions in the strategic form that eliminates
the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of the extensive game.


h with P (h0 ) = i) are weakly dominated actions in G. In the sequence
of eliminations that we define, all of these weakly dominated actions are
eliminated from G at this stage. Having performed this elimination for
each history h with `(Γ(h)) = 1, we turn to histories h with `(Γ(h)) = 2
and perform an analogous elimination; we continue back to the begin-
ning of the game in this way. Every strategy of player i that remains
at the end of this procedure chooses the action selected by backwards
induction after any history that is consistent with player i’s subgame
perfect equilibrium strategy. Thus in particular the subgame perfect
equilibrium remains and every strategy profile that remains generates
the unique subgame perfect equilibrium outcome.
   Note, however, that other orders of elimination may remove all sub-
game perfect equilibria. In the game in Figure 109.1, for example, the
unique subgame perfect equilibrium is (BE, D), while if in the strategic
form the weakly dominated action AE is eliminated then D is weakly
dominated in the remaining game; if AF is eliminated after D then
neither of the two remaining action profiles ((BE, C) and (BF, C)) are
subgame perfect equilibria of the extensive game.
   Note also that if some player is indifferent between two terminal his-
tories then there may be (i ) an order of elimination that eliminates a
subgame perfect equilibrium outcome and (ii ) no order of elimination for
which all surviving strategy profiles generate subgame perfect equilib-
rium outcomes. The game in Figure 110.1 demonstrates (i ): the strate-
gies AC, AD, and BD of player 1 are all weakly dominated by BC ; after
they are eliminated no remaining pair of actions yields the subgame per-
fect equilibrium outcome (A, R). If the payoff (1, 2) is replaced by (2, 0)
 110                       Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information



                                                                   L      R

                            1b                            AC      0, 0   1, 2
                   A      H
                                 HH B
              2 r
                                    Hr1
                                      H                   AD      0, 0   1, 2
             L @R                   C @D
           r       @r
                   @               r      @r
                                          @               BC      1, 1   1, 1
         0, 0       1, 2         1, 1      0, 0
                                                          BD      0, 0   0, 0

 Figure 110.1 An extensive game (left) and its strategic form (right). There is an
 order of elimination of weakly dominated actions in the strategic form that eliminates
 a subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of the extensive game.


 then the modified game demonstrates (ii ): the outcome (A, L), which is
 not even a Nash equilibrium outcome, survives any order of elimination.

 6.6.2     Forward Induction
 We now present two examples that show that the iterated elimination
 of weakly dominated strategies captures some interesting features of
 players’ reasoning in extensive games.
 Example 110.1 (BoS with an outside option) Consider the extensive
  game with perfect information and simultaneous moves shown in Fig-
  ure 111.1. In this game player 1 first decides whether to stay at home
  and read a book or to go to a concert. If she decides to read a book then
  the game ends; if she decides to go to a concert then she is engaged in
  the game BoS (Example 15.3) with player 2. (After the history Concert
  the players choose actions simultaneously.) Each player prefers to hear
  the music of his favorite composer in the company of the other player
  rather than either go to a concert alone or stay at home, but prefers to
  stay at home rather than either go out alone or hear the music of his
  less-preferred composer.
     In the reduced strategic form of this game S is strictly dominated for
  player 1 by Book. If it is eliminated then S is weakly dominated for
  player 2 by B. Finally, Book is strictly dominated by B for player 1.
  The outcome that remains is (B, B).
     This sequence of eliminations corresponds to the following argument
  for the extensive game. If player 2 has to make a decision he knows that
  player 1 has not chosen Book. Such a choice makes sense for player 1
 6.6 Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Strategies                  111


                     1b
                     HH                                   B      S
           Book          HConcert
         r                   Hr
                           HH
                                                  Book    2, 2   2, 2
       2, 2                  B      S
                                                     B    3, 1   0, 0
                          B    3, 1   0, 0
                                                      S   0, 0   1, 3
                           S   0, 0   1, 3


 Figure 111.1 BoS with an outside option (left; an extensive game with perfect
 information and simultaneous moves) and its reduced strategic form (right).


 only if she plans to choose B. Thus player 2 should choose B also. The
 logic of such an argument is referred to in the literature as “forward
 induction”.
    In the following example the iterated elimination of weakly dominated
 strategies leads to a conclusion that is more striking.
 Example 111.1 (Burning money) Consider the game at the top of Fig-
  ure 112.1. Two individuals are going to play BoS with monetary payoffs
  as in the left-hand table in the figure. Before doing so player 1 can
  discard a dollar (take the action D) or refrain from doing so (take the
  action 0); her move is observed by player 2. Both players are risk-
  neutral. (Note that the two subgames that follow player 1’s initial move
  are strategically identical.)
    The reduced strategic form of the game is shown in the bottom of
  Figure 112.1. Weakly dominated actions can be eliminated iteratively
  as follows.
  1. DS is weakly dominated for player 1 by 0B
  2. SS is weakly dominated for player 2 by SB
  3. BS is weakly dominated for player 2 by BB
  4. 0S is strictly dominated for player 1 by DB
  5. SB is weakly dominated for player 2 by BB
  6. DB is strictly dominated for player 1 by 0B
 The single strategy pair that remains is (0B, BB): the fact that player 1
 can throw away a dollar implies, under iterated elimination of weakly
 dominated actions, that the outcome is player 1’s favorite.
112                    Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information


                                        1b
                                        HH
                                 0             HD
                            r                      Hr
                                                 HH
                      B        S                   B                S

               B     3, 1     0, 0           B       2, 1          −1, 0

               S     0, 0     1, 3           S       −1, 0         0, 3


                            BB       BS      SB             SS

                    0B      3, 1     3, 1     0, 0          0, 0

                     0S     0, 0     0, 0     1, 3          1, 3

                   DB       2, 1     −1, 0    2, 1      −1, 0

                    DS      −1, 0    0, 3    −1, 0          0, 3

Figure 112.1 An extensive game with perfect information and simultaneous moves
in which player 1 can choose to destroy a dollar before playing the game BoS. The
extensive form is given at the top and the reduced strategic form at the bottom.


   An intuitive argument that corresponds to this sequence of elimina-
tions is the following. Player 1 must anticipate that if she chooses 0 then
she will obtain an expected payoff of at least 34 , since for every belief
about the behavior of player 2 she has an action that yields her at least
this expected payoff. Thus if player 2 observes that player 1 chooses D
then he must expect that player 1 will subsequently choose B (since the
choice of S cannot possibly yield player 1 a payoff in excess of 34 ). Given
this, player 2 should choose B if player 1 chooses D; player 1 knows this,
so that she can expect to obtain a payoff of 2 if she chooses D. But now
player 2 can rationalize the choice 0 by player 1 only by believing that
player 1 will choose B (since S can yield player 1 no more than 1), so
that the best action of player 2 after observing 0 is B. This makes 0 the
best action for player 1.
   We now discuss these two examples in light of the distinction we made
in Section 1.5 between the “steady state” and “deductive” approaches to
game theory. From the point of view of the steady state interpretation
6.6 Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Strategies                 113



the two examples share the same argument: the beliefs of player 2 in the
equilibria in which the outcome is Book in the first example or (0, (S, S))
in the second example are both unreasonable in the sense that if player 1
deviates (to Concert or D) then the only sensible conclusion for player 2
to reach is that player 1 intends to play B subsequently, which means
that player 2 should play B, making the deviation profitable for player 1.
From the point of view of the deductive interpretation the two games
differ, at least to the extent that the argument in the second example
is more complex. In the first example player 1 has to reason about how
player 2 will interpret an action (Concert) that she takes. In the second
example player 1’s reasoning about player 2’s interpretation of her in-
tended action 0 involves her belief about how player 2 would rationalize
an action (D) that she does not take.
   The second example raises a question about how to specify a game
that captures a given situation. The arguments we have made are obvi-
ously based on the supposition that the game in Figure 112.1 reflects the
situation as perceived by the players. In particular, they presume that
the players perceive the possibility of disposing of a dollar to be relevant
to the play of BoS. We believe this to be an implausible presumption: no
reasonable person would consider the possibility of disposing a dollar to
be relevant to the choice of which concert to attend. Thus we argue that
a game that models the situation should simply exclude the possibility
of disposal. (ar argues this to be so even if the game, including the move
in which player 1 can burn money, is presented explicitly to the players
by a referee, since before a player analyzes a situation strategically he
“edits” the description of the situation, eliminating “irrelevant” factors.)
On what principles do we base the claim that the possibility of disposing
of a dollar is irrelevant? The answer is far from clear; some ideas follow.
(a) The disposal does not affect the players’ payoffs in BoS. (b) If the
disposal is informative about the rationality of player 1, a sensible con-
clusion might be that a player who destroys a dollar is simply irrational.
(In contrast, spending money on advertising, for example, may signal
useful information.) (c) The dissimilarity between the two parts of the
game makes it unlikely that player 2 will try to deduce from player 1’s
behavior in the first stage how she will behave in the second stage.
   One interpretation of the arguments in this section is that each player
accompanies his actions by messages explaining his future intentions.
Thus to investigate the arguments further it may seem natural to aug-
ment the games by adding moves that have such explicit meaning. How-
ever, if we do so then we face difficulties, as the following example shows.
 114                  Chapter 6. Extensive Games with Perfect Information



                                    A     B

                              A    2, 2   0, 0

                              B    0, 0   1, 1

              Figure 114.1 The game relevant to Exercise 114.2.


 Suppose that BoS is to be played and that player 1 is able, before BoS
 starts, to send a message (any string of symbols) to player 2. Assume
 further that each player cares only about the outcome of BoS, not about
 the content of any message that is sent or about the relationship between
 the action that he takes and the message. This extensive game has sub-
 game perfect equilibrium outcomes in which both (B, B) and (S, S) are
 played in BoS; in particular, there is an equilibrium in which player 2
 completely ignores player 1’s message. This is so because player 2 is not
 forced to interpret the message sent by player 1 as meaningful, even if
 the message is “I am about to play B”. The fact that a message can be
 sent does not affect the outcome because the names of the actions do
 not play any role in the concept of Nash equilibrium. A reasonable con-
 clusion appears to be that a modification of the model of an extensive
 game is required if we wish to model communication between players.
? Exercise 114.1     Examine the variant of the game at the top of Fig-
 ure 112.1 in which player 1 first has the option of burning a dollar, then
 player 2, having observed player 1’s action, is also allowed to burn a
 dollar, and finally players 1 and 2 engage in BoS. Find the set of out-
 comes that survive iterated elimination of weakly dominated actions and
 compare it with the outcome that does so in the game in Figure 112.1.
? Exercise 114.2   Consider the game that differs from that at the top
 of Figure 112.1 only in that the game in which the players engage after
 player 1 has the option to burn a dollar is that shown in Figure 114.1.
 Find the set of outcomes that survives iterated elimination of weakly
 dominated actions.

 Notes

 The notion of an extensive game is due to von Neumann and Morgen-
 stern (1944); Kuhn (1950, 1953) suggested the formulation we describe.
 The notion of subgame perfect equilibrium is due to Selten (1965).
Notes                                                                 115



   The one deviation property (Lemma 98.2) is closely related to a prin-
ciple of dynamic programming. Proposition 99.2 is due to Kuhn (1950,
1953). The idea of regarding games with simultaneous moves as games
with perfect information is due to Dubey and Kaneko (1984). Some of
our discussion of the interpretation of a strategy in Section 6.4 is based
on Rubinstein (1991). The chain-store game studied in Section 6.5.1 is
due to Selten (1978) and the centipede game studied in Section 6.5.2
is due to Rosenthal (1981). Some of the issues that these games raise
are studied by Reny (1993). (See Section 12.3.2 for a variant of the
chain-store game due to Kreps and Wilson (1982a) and Milgrom and
Roberts (1982).) Moulin (1986) gives results that relate the procedure
of iterated elimination of weakly dominated actions and the solution
of subgame perfect equilibrium. The game in Figure 109.1 is taken
(with modification) from Reny (1992). The idea of forward induction
(together with the game in Example 110.1) is due to Kohlberg; it is
discussed in Kohlberg and Mertens (1986). The game in Example 111.1
is due to van Damme (1989); see also Ben-Porath and Dekel (1992) and
Osborne (1990). (For more discussion of the issues that arise in this
game see Rubinstein (1991).)
   Exercise 103.2 is based on an idea of Kreps; Exercise 108.1 is due to
Radner (1980) (see also Radner (1986)).
7          Bargaining Games




Groups of people often have to choose collectively an outcome in a sit-
uation in which unanimity about the best outcome is lacking. Here we
study a model, based on an extensive game with perfect information,
that captures some of the features of such a situation.



7.1   Bargaining and Game Theory

Game theory deals with situations in which people’s interests conflict.
The people involved may try to resolve the conflict by committing them-
selves voluntarily to a course of action that is beneficial to all of them.
If there is more than one course of action more desirable than disagree-
ment for all individuals and there is conflict over which course of action
to pursue then some form of negotiation over how to resolve the con-
flict is necessary. The negotiation process may be modeled using the
tools of game theory; the model in this chapter is an example of such
an analysis.
   Since the presence of a conflict of interest is central to game theoretic
situations, the theory of bargaining is more than just an application of
game theory; models of bargaining lie at the heart of the subject and
have attracted a great deal of attention since its inception. Most of the
early work uses the axiomatic approach initiated by John Nash, whose
work we discuss in Chapter 15. In this chapter we use the model of an
extensive game with perfect information to study some features of bar-
gaining, in particular the influence of the participants’ impatience and
risk aversion on the outcome.
118                                                Chapter 7. Bargaining Games



7.2    A Bargaining Game of Alternating Offers

Consider a situation in which two bargainers have the opportunity to
reach agreement on an outcome in some set X and perceive that if they
fail to do so then the outcome will be some fixed event D. The set
X may, for example, be the set of feasible divisions of a desirable pie
and D may be the event in which neither party receives any of the pie.
To model such a situation as an extensive game we have to specify the
procedure that the parties follow when negotiating.
   The procedure we study is one in which the players alternate offers.
It can be described conveniently by introducing the variable “time”, the
values of which are the nonnegative integers. The first move of the game
occurs in period 0, when player 1 makes a proposal (a member of X),
which player 2 then either accepts or rejects. Acceptance ends the game
while rejection leads to period 1, in which player 2 makes a proposal,
which player 1 has to accept or reject. Again, acceptance ends the game;
rejection leads to period 2, in which it is once again player 1’s turn to
make a proposal. The game continues in this fashion: so long as no offer
has been accepted, in every even period player 1 makes a proposal that
player 2 must either accept or reject, and in every odd period player 2
makes a proposal that player 1 must either accept or reject. There is no
bound on the number of rounds of negotiation: the game has an infinite
horizon. (See Section 8.2 for a discussion of the choice between a finite
and infinite horizon when modeling a situation as a game.) The fact
that some offer is rejected places no restrictions on the offers that may
subsequently be made. In particular, a player who rejects a proposal x
may subsequently make a proposal that is worse for him than x. If no
offer is ever accepted then the outcome is the disagreement event D.
   We now give a formal description of the situation as an extensive
game with perfect information (see Definition 89.1). The set of players
is N = {1, 2}. Let X, the set of possible agreements, be a compact
connected subset of a Euclidian space, and let T be the set of nonnegative
integers. The set of histories H is the set of all sequences of one of the
following types, where t ∈ T , xs ∈ X for all s, A means “accept”, and
R means “reject”.
  I. ∅ (the initial history), or (x0 , R, x1 , R, . . . , xt , R)
 II. (x0 , R, x1 , R, . . . , xt )
III. (x0 , R, x1 , R, . . . , xt , A)
IV. (x0 , R, x1 , R, . . .)
7.2 A Bargaining Game of Alternating Offers                                    119



   It follows from this description of the histories that the player whose
turn it is to move chooses a member of X after a history of type I and
a member of {A, R} after a history of type II. Histories of type III and
IV are terminal; those of type III are finite, while those of type IV are
infinite. The player function is defined as follows: P (h) = 1 if h is of
type I or type II and t is odd or if h is empty; P (h) = 2 if h is of type I
or type II and t is even.
   To complete the description of the game we need to specify the play-
ers’ preferences over terminal histories. We assume that each player
cares only about whether agreement is reached and the time and con-
tent of the agreement, not about the path of proposals that preceded
the agreement. Precisely, the set of terminal histories is partitioned as
follows: for each x ∈ X and t ∈ T the set of all histories of type III for
which xt = x is a member of the partition, denoted by (x, t), and the set
of all histories of type IV is a member of the partition, denoted by D.
The preference relation of each player i over histories is induced from a
preference relation %i over the set (X × T ) ∪ {D} of members of this
partition (that is, each player is indifferent between any two histories
that lie in the same member of the partition). We assume that each
player i’s preference relation %i satisfies the following conditions.
   •   No agreement is worse than disagreement: (x, t) %i D for all (x, t) ∈
       X × T.
   •   Time is valuable: (x, t) %i (x, t + 1) for every period t ∈ T and
       every agreement x ∈ X, with strict preference if (x, 0) i D.
   •   Preferences are stationary: (x, t) %i (y, t + 1) if and only if (x, 0) %i
       (y, 1), and (x, t) %i (y, t) if and only if (x, 0) %i (y, 0).
   •   Preferences are continuous: if xn ∈ X and yn ∈ X for all n, {xn }
       converges to x ∈ X, {yn } converges to y ∈ X, and (xn , t) %i (yn , s)
       for all n, then (x, t) %i (y, s).
   These assumptions imply that for any δ ∈ (0, 1) there is a continuous
function ui : X → R such that the preference relation %i is represented on
X ×T by the function δ t ui (x) in the sense that (x, t) %i (y, s) if and only
if δ t ui (x) ≥ δ s ui (y). (This follows from Fishburn and Rubinstein (1982,
Theorems 1 and 2).) Note that if δ t ui (x) represents %i then for any  ∈
(0, 1) the function t vi (x) where vi is defined by vi (x) = (ui (x))(ln )/(ln δ)
also represents %i . Thus if δ t ui (x) and t vi (x) are representations of two
preference relations and δ >  then we cannot conclude that the first
preference relation is more “patient” than the second unless vi = ui .
 120                                           Chapter 7. Bargaining Games



                                1b
                                @
                                  @
                                 x0  @
                             rX                                t=0
                    2         
                                  XX
                                        @
                                        @
                                    XXX
                                          XXX
                         R              A      Xr(x0 , 0)
                                               XX
                               
                         2 r
                             
                             @
                                 @
                             x1 @
                            rXX @                        t=1
             1                     X
                                     @
                                    XX
                                      XXX
                     R                A      Xr(x1 , 1)
                                            XXX
                       
                      
                     

 Figure 120.1 A representation of the first two periods of a bargaining game of
 alternating offers.


   We refer to the extensive game with perfect information hN, H, P,
 (%i )i thus defined as the bargaining game of alternating offers
 hX, (%i )i.
   The first two periods of such a game are illustrated in Figure 120.1.
 (Note that x0 is only one of the proposals available to player 1 at the
 start of the game, and x1 is only one of the proposals available to player 2
 after he rejects x0 .)
   An important example of a bargaining game of alternating offers is
 the following.
 Example 120.1 (Split-the-pie) The set of possible agreements X is the
  set of all divisions of a desirable pie:

            X = {(x1 , x2 ): xi ≥ 0 for i = 1, 2 and x1 + x2 = 1}.

 The preference relation %i of each player i over (X × T ) ∪ {D} has the
 properties that (x, t) %i (y, t) if and only if xi ≥ yi (pie is desirable) and
 D ∼1 ((0, 1), 0) and D ∼2 ((1, 0), 0) (in the event of disagreement both
 players receive nothing). Thus %i can be represented on X × T by a
 function of the form δit wi (xi ) in which 0 < δi < 1 and wi is increasing
 and continuous, with wi (0) = 0.
7.3 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium                                              121



   The set of Nash equilibria of a bargaining game of alternating offers
is very large. In particular, for any x∗ ∈ X there is a Nash equilibrium
in which the players immediately agree on x∗ (i.e. player 1’s equilibrium
strategy assigns x∗ to the initial history and player 2’s strategy assigns
A to the history x∗ ). One such equilibrium is that in which both players
always propose x∗ and always accept a proposal x if and only if x = x∗ .
(Alternatively, each player i could accept a proposal x in period t if
and only if (x, t) %i (x∗ , t).) In addition, for many specifications of the
players’ preferences there are Nash equilibria in which an agreement is
not reached immediately. For example, for any agreement x and period t
in a split-the-pie game there is a Nash equilibrium for which the outcome
is the acceptance of x in period t. One such equilibrium is that in which
through period t − 1 each player demands the whole pie and rejects all
proposals, and from period t on proposes x and accepts only x.
   These Nash equilibria illustrate the point we made at the end of Sec-
tion 6.1.3: the notion of Nash equilibrium does not exclude the use of
“incredible threats”. Consider the Nash equilibrium of a split-the-pie
game in which both players always propose x∗ and player i accepts a
proposal x in period t if and only if (x, t) %i (x∗ , t). If (x∗ , 0) 2 (x∗ , 1)
then by the continuity of the players’ preferences there is an agreement
x in which x2 is slightly less than x∗2 for which (x, 0) 1 (x∗ , 0) and
(x, 0) 2 (x∗ , 1). In the equilibrium player 2’s strategy dictates that in
any period he reject such a proposal x; this “threat” induces player 1 to
propose x∗ . Player 2’s threat is incredible, given player 1’s strategy: the
best outcome that can occur if player 2 carries out his threat to reject
x is that there is agreement on x∗ in the next period, an outcome that
player 2 likes less than agreement on x in period 0, which he can achieve
by accepting x. As we explained in the previous chapter, the notion of
subgame perfect equilibrium is designed to isolate equilibria in which no
player’s strategy has this unattractive property.


7.3     Subgame Perfect Equilibrium

7.3.1   Characterization

We now show that under some additional assumptions a bargaining game
of alternating offers has an essentially unique subgame perfect equilib-
rium, which we characterize. The first assumption is designed to avoid
redundancies.
122                                           Chapter 7. Bargaining Games



A1 For no two agreements x and y is it the case that (x, 0) ∼i (y, 0) for
   both i = 1 and i = 2.
The next assumption simplifies the analysis.
A2 (bi , 1) ∼j (bi , 0) ∼j D for i = 1, 2, j 6= i where bi is the best
   agreement for player i.
To state the next two assumptions we define the Pareto frontier of the
set X of agreements to be the set of agreements x for which there is no
agreement y with (y, 0) i (x, 0) for i = 1, 2. We refer to a member of
the Pareto frontier as an efficient agreement.
A3 The Pareto frontier of X is strictly monotone (if an agreement x is
   efficient then there is no other agreement y such that (y, 0) %i (x, 0)
   for both players i) and connected.
A4 There is a unique pair (x∗ , y ∗ ) of agreements for which (x∗ , 1) ∼1
   (y ∗ , 0), (y ∗ , 1) ∼2 (x∗ , 0), and both x∗ and y ∗ are efficient.
    The most important of these assumptions is A4. In a split-the-pie
game a sufficient condition for it to be satisfied is that each player’s
preference relation exhibit “increasing loss to delay”: xi − fi (x) is an
increasing function of xi for each player i, where f (x) is the agreement
for which (f (x), 0) ∼i (x, 1). Another case in which assumption A4 is
satisfied is that in which the Pareto frontier of the set X of agreements
is the set {x ∈ R2 : x2 = g(x1 )} for some decreasing concave function g
and the preference relation of each player i is represented by the function
δit xi for some 0 < δi < 1.
Proposition 122.1 A bargaining game of alternating offers hX, (%i )i
that satisfies A1 through A4 has a subgame perfect equilibrium. Let
(x∗ , y ∗ ) be the unique pair of efficient agreements for which
        (x∗ , 1) ∼1 (y ∗ , 0)   and     (y ∗ , 1) ∼2 (x∗ , 0).      (122.2)
In every subgame perfect equilibrium player 1 always proposes x∗ , ac-
cepts y ∗ and any proposal y for which (y, 0) 1 (y ∗ , 0), and rejects any
proposal y for which (y, 0) ≺1 (y ∗ , 0); player 2 always proposes y ∗ , ac-
cepts x∗ and any proposal x for which (x, 0) 2 (x∗ , 0), and rejects any
proposal x for which (x, 0) ≺2 (x∗ , 0).
Proof. First we verify that the pair of strategies defined in the proposi-
tion is a subgame perfect equilibrium. To do so we use the fact that the
game has the “one deviation property”: a pair of strategies is a subgame
perfect equilibrium if and only if for every history h the player whose
 7.3 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium                                              123



 turn it is to move cannot deviate profitably by changing his action after
 h alone. This property holds for every game with a finite horizon, as
 Lemma 98.2 shows. The proof that it holds also for a bargaining game
 of alternating offers is left as an exercise.
? Exercise 123.1    Show that every bargaining game of alternating offers
 satisfies the one deviation property.
   We now need to check the optimality only of the action of each player
 after any possible nonterminal history. The most interesting case is a
 history of type II. Suppose that it is player 2’s turn to respond to a
 proposal xt in period t. If he accepts this proposal then the outcome is
 (xt , t) while if he rejects it the outcome is (y ∗ , t+1). Since his preferences
 are stationary it follows from (122.2) that (xt , t) %2 (y ∗ , t + 1) if and
 only if (xt , 0) %2 (x∗ , 0) and thus his acceptance rule is optimal.
   We now turn to the more difficult part of the proof: the argument
 that the subgame perfect equilibrium is essentially unique. (The only
 indeterminacy is in each player’s response to a proposal that he regards
 as indifferent to the equilibrium proposal of the other player and the
 other player regards as worse; note that no such proposal is efficient.)
   Given the stationarity of the players’ preferences, for i = 1, 2 all
 subgames that begin with a proposal of player i are identical. Let Gi
 be such a subgame (G1 is the game itself). Choose δ ∈ (0, 1) and for
 i = 1, 2, let ui : X → R be such that δ t ui (x) represents %i on X × T .
 Let Mi (Gi ) be the supremum of the set of subgame perfect equilibrium
 (SPE) payoffs of player i in Gi :

    Mi (Gi ) = sup{δ t ui (x): there is a SPE of Gi with outcome (x, t)}.

 Let mi (Gi ) be the corresponding infimum.

   Step 1. M1 (G1 ) = m1 (G1 ) = u1 (x∗ ) and M2 (G2 ) = m2 (G2 ) = u2 (y ∗ ).
 (That is, in every SPE of G1 the payoff of player 1 is u1 (x∗ ) and in every
 SPE of G2 the payoff of player 2 is u2 (y ∗ ).)

   Proof. Describe the pairs of payoffs on the Pareto frontier of X by
 the function φ: if x is efficient then u2 (x) = φ(u1 (x)). By A3 and the
 continuity of the preference relations, the domain of φ is an interval and
 φ is continuous, one-to-one, and decreasing.
   We first show that

                           m2 (G2 ) ≥ φ(δM1 (G1 )).                       (123.2)
124                                            Chapter 7. Bargaining Games



If player 1 rejects a proposal of player 2 in the first period of G2 then
her payoff is not more than δM1 (G1 ). Hence in any SPE of G2 she must
accept any proposal that gives her more than δM1 (G1 ). Thus player 2’s
payoff is not less than φ(δM1 (G1 )) in any SPE of G2 .
   We now show that

                        M1 (G1 ) ≤ φ−1 (δm2 (G2 )).                    (124.1)

In any SPE of G1 player 2’s payoff is not less than δm2 (G2 ) since player 2
can always reject the opening proposal of player 1. Thus the payoff that
player 1 can obtain in any SPE of G1 does not exceed φ−1 (δm2 (G2 )).
   Finally, we argue that M1 (G1 ) = u1 (x∗ ). Since there is an SPE of
G1 in which immediate agreement is reached on x∗ we have M1 (G1 ) ≥
u1 (x∗ ). We now show that our assumptions about the set of agreements
and the uniqueness of the solution of (122.2) imply that M1 (G1 ) ≤
u1 (x∗ ).
   By A2 we have δu2 (b1 ) = u2 (b1 ), so that u2 (b1 ) = 0; by A3 and the
definition of φ we have δφ(δu1 (b1 )) > 0 = u2 (b1 ) = φ(u1 (b1 )). Since
φ is decreasing we conclude that u1 (b1 ) > φ−1 (δφ(δu1 (b1 ))). Now, by
(123.2) and (124.1) we have M1 (G1 ) ≤ φ−1 (δφ(δM1 (G1 ))). Thus by
the continuity of φ there exists U1 ∈ [M1 (G1 ), u1 (b1 )) satisfying U1 =
φ−1 (δφ(δU1 )). If M1 (G1 ) > u1 (x∗ ) then U1 6= u1 (x∗ ), so that taking a∗
and b∗ to be efficient agreements for which u1 (a∗ ) = U1 and u1 (b∗ ) =
δu1 (a∗ ) it follows that (a∗ , b∗ ) is a solution to (122.2) that differs from
(x∗ , y ∗ ), contradicting A4. Thus M1 (G1 ) ≤ u1 (x∗ ).
   Similarly we can show that m1 (G1 ) = u1 (x∗ ), M2 (G2 ) = u2 (y ∗ ), and
m2 (G2 ) = u2 (y ∗ ), completing the proof of this step.
  Step 2. In every SPE of G1 player 1’s initial proposal is x∗ , which
player 2 immediately accepts.
  Proof. In every SPE of G1 player 1’s payoff is u1 (x∗ ) (by Step 1)
and player 2’s payoff is at least δu2 (y ∗ ) = u2 (x∗ ), since the rejection of
player 1’s proposal leads to the subgame G2 , in which player 2’s SPE
payoff is u2 (y ∗ ). Thus by A1 and the fact that x∗ is efficient, player 1’s
opening proposal is x∗ , which is accepted by player 2.
  Step 3. In every SPE of G1 player 2’s strategy accepts any proposal x
for which (x, 0) 2 (x∗ , 0) and rejects any proposal x for which (x, 0) ≺2
(x∗ , 0).
   Proof. A rejection by player 2 leads to G2 , in which player 2’s payoff
is u2 (y ∗ ) (by Step 1). Since u2 (x∗ ) = δu2 (y ∗ ), player 2 must accept
 7.3 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium                                         125



 any proposal x for which (x, 0) 2 (x∗ , 0) and reject any x for which
 (x, 0) ≺2 (x∗ , 0). (There is no restriction on player 2’s response to a
 proposal x 6= x∗ for which (x, 0) ∼2 (x∗ , 0).)
   Finally, arguments analogous to those in Steps 3 and 4 apply to
 player 2’s proposals and player 1’s acceptance rule in every SPE of G2 .2
   Note that if all the members of the set X of agreements are efficient
 (as, for example, in a split-the-pie game) then a bargaining game of alter-
 nating offers has a unique (not just essentially unique) subgame perfect
 equilibrium. The following example is frequently used in applications.
 Example 125.1 Consider a split-the-pie game in which each player i’s
  preferences are represented by the function δit xi for some δi ∈ (0, 1).
  Then we have x∗ = (a∗ , 1 − a∗ ) and y ∗ = (1 − b∗ , b∗ ), where a∗ and b∗
  solve the pair of equations 1 − b∗ = δ1 a∗ and 1 − a∗ = δ2 b∗ , so that
  a∗ = (1 − δ2 )/(1 − δ1 δ2 ) and b∗ = (1 − δ1 )/(1 − δ1 δ2 ).
    An interesting case that is not covered by Proposition 122.1 is a variant
 of a split-the-pie game in which each player i incurs the cost ci > 0 for
 every period in which agreement is not reached (and there is no upper
 bound on the total of these costs that a player can incur). That is,
 player i’s payoff if the agreement x is concluded in period t is xi − ci t.
 This case violates A2, since (x, 0) i (x, 1) for every agreement x. It
 also violates A4: if c1 6= c2 then there is no pair of agreements satisfying
 the two conditions while if c1 = c2 then there are many such pairs of
 agreements.
? Exercise 125.2

  a. Show that if c1 < c2 then the game described in the previous para-
     graph has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium, and that this equi-
     librium has the same structure as that in Proposition 122.1 with
     x∗ = (1, 0) and y ∗ = (1 − c1 , c1 ).
  b. Show that if c1 = c2 = c < 1 then the game has many subgame
     perfect equilibrium outcomes including, if c < 13 , equilibria in which
     agreement is delayed.

 7.3.2   Properties of Equilibrium
  Efficiency The structure of a bargaining game of alternating offers al-
 lows bargaining to continue for ever, but, under assumptions A1 through
 A4, in all subgame perfect equilibria agreement is reached immediately
126                                              Chapter 7. Bargaining Games



on an agreement on the Pareto frontier of X (so that the outcome of the
game is efficient).
 Stationarity of Strategies The subgame perfect equilibrium strategies
are stationary: for any history after which it is player i’s turn to propose
an agreement he proposes the same agreement, and for any history after
which it is his turn to respond to a proposal he uses the same criterion
to choose his response. We have not restricted players to use stationary
strategies; rather, such strategies emerge as a conclusion.
 First Mover Advantage Consider again Example 125.1. If δ1 = δ2 = δ
then the amount of the pie that player 1 gets is a∗ = 1/(1 + δ) > 21 . The
only asymmetry in the game is that player 1 moves first; the fact that
she obtains more than half of the pie indicates that there is an advantage
to being the first to make a proposal. This first-mover advantage holds
more generally: using A3 and the fact that x∗ and y ∗ are efficient, we
have (x∗ , 0) 1 (y ∗ , 0) in any bargaining game of alternating offers that
satisfies A1 through A4.
 Comparative Statics of Impatience The key feature of the players’ pref-
erences is that they exhibit impatience. It seems reasonable to expect
that the more impatient a player the worse off he is in equilibrium. This
is indeed so in the game in Example 125.1, since the values of a∗ and b∗
are increasing in δ1 and δ2 respectively. We now generalize this result to
any bargaining game of alternating offers that satisfies A1 through A4.
   Define %0i to be at least as impatient as %i if both induce the same
ordering on X × {0} and (x, 1) -0i (y, 0) whenever (x, 1) ∼i (y, 0).
Proposition 126.1 Let hX, (%i )i and hX, (%0i )i be bargaining games
of alternating offers that satisfy A1 through A4 and suppose that %01 is
at least as impatient as %1 and %02 = %2 . Let x∗ be the agreement
reached in every subgame perfect equilibrium of hX, (%i )i and let x0 be
the agreement reached in every subgame perfect equilibrium of hX, (%0i )i.
Then (x∗ , 0) %1 (x0 , 0).
Proof. Assume not (so that, in particular, x∗ 6= x0 ). Consider the subset
S of X × X consisting of all pairs (x, y) such that x and y are efficient
and (y, 1) ∼2 (x, 0). Let y 0 be the agreement for which (x0 , y 0 ) ∈ S.
Since (x0 , 1) ∼01 (y 0 , 0) (by (122.2)) it follows that (x0 , 1) %1 (y 0 , 0) and
hence (x0 , 1) 1 (y 0 , 0) by A4. By A2 we have (b1 , b1 ) ∈ S, and by the
assumption that time is valuable and A4 we have (b1 , 1) ≺1 (b1 , 0). Since
X is compact and connected, the Pareto frontier of X is compact and
connected, so that there is an agreement x̂ on the path on the Pareto
 7.4 Variations and Extensions                                              127



 frontier that connects x0 and b1 such that (x̂, ŷ) ∈ S and (x̂, 1) ∼1
 (ŷ, 0). Since (x0 , 0) 1 (x∗ , 0) and (b1 , 0) %1 (x0 , 0) we have x̂ 6= x∗ ,
 contradicting A4.                                                           2


 7.4     Variations and Extensions

 7.4.1    The Importance of the Procedure
 To model bargaining as an extensive game we need to give an explicit
 description of the sequential structure of the decision problems encoun-
 tered by the players: we need to specify a bargaining procedure. The
 variant of the model of a bargaining game of alternating offers considered
 in the next exercise demonstrates that the structure of the bargaining
 procedure plays an important role in determining the outcome.
? Exercise 127.1     Assume that player 1 makes all the offers (rather than
 the players alternating offers). Show that under A1 through A3 the
 resulting game has an essentially unique subgame perfect equilibrium,
 in which regardless of the players’ preferences the agreement reached is
 b1 , the best possible agreement for player 1.
    In a bargaining game of alternating offers the procedure treats the
 players almost symmetrically. The fact that the player to make the first
 offer is better off than his opponent in such a game is a vestige of the
 extreme advantage that a player enjoys if he is the only one to make
 offers.

 7.4.2    Variants that Eliminate a Key Feature of the Model
 A key feature of the model of a bargaining game of alternating offers is
 the ability of one player to force the other to choose between an agree-
 ment now and a more desirable agreement later. To illustrate this point,
 consider first the game in which the players make proposals simultane-
 ously in each period, agreement being reached only if the proposals in
 any given period are compatible. In this case neither player can force the
 other to choose between an agreement now and a better agreement later;
 every efficient agreement is a subgame perfect equilibrium outcome.
    To illustrate the point further, consider the case in which the set X
 of agreements contains finitely many elements, so that a player’s ability
 to offer an agreement today that is slightly better than the agreement
 that the responder expects tomorrow is limited. In this case the range
 128                                          Chapter 7. Bargaining Games



 of subgame perfect equilibrium payoffs depends on the richness of the
 set X. The following exercise demonstrates this point in a specific case.
? Exercise 128.1      Consider a variant of a split-the-pie game in which
 the pie can be divided only into integral multiples of a basic indivisible
 unit  > 0 and the preferences of each player i are represented by the
 function δ t xi . Denote this game by Γ() and the game in which the pie
 is perfectly divisible by Γ(0).
  a. Show that if δ is close enough to 1 then for every agreement x ∈ X
     there is a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ() for which the outcome
     is (x, 0).
  b. Show that if δ is close enough to 1 then for every outcome z ∈
     (X × T ) ∪ {D} there is a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ() in
     which the outcome is z (use the equilibrium strategies in part a for
     x = (1, 0) and x = (0, 1) to deter deviations).
  c. Show conversely that for every δ ∈ (0, 1) and every η > 0 there
     exists  > 0 such that if  <  then for i = 1, 2 the difference between
     player i’s payoff in every subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ() and his
     payoff in the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ(0) is less than
     η and agreement is reached immediately.

 7.4.3   Opting Out
 An interesting class of extensions of the model of a bargaining game of
 alternating offers is obtained by allowing one or both players, at various
 points in the game, to “opt out” (without requiring the approval of the
 other player) rather than continue bargaining. A simple case is that in
 which only one of the players, say player 2, can opt out, and can do so
 only when responding to an offer. Denote the outcome in which he does
 so in period t by (Out, t), and assume that (Out, t) ∼1 D for all t ∈ T .
    Suppose first that (Out, 0) ≺2 (y ∗ , 1), where y ∗ is the unique subgame
 perfect equilibrium proposal of player 2 in the standard bargaining game
 of alternating offers. Then the ability of player 2 to opt out has no
 effect on the outcome: although player 2 has an additional “threat”,
 it is worthless since he prefers to continue bargaining and obtain the
 outcome y ∗ with one period of delay.
    Now suppose that (Out, 0) 2 (y ∗ , 1). Then player 2’s threat is not
 worthless. In this case (under A1 through A4), in any subgame perfect
 equilibrium player 1 always proposes the efficient agreement x̂ for which
 (x̂, 0) ∼2 (Out, 0), which player 2 accepts, and player 2 always proposes
 7.4 Variations and Extensions                                                129



 the efficient agreement ŷ for which (ŷ, 0) ∼1 (x̂, 1), which player 1 ac-
 cepts. Thus in this case the ability of player 2 to exercise an outside
 option causes the outcome of bargaining to be equivalent for him to the
 outcome that results if he opts out.
? Exercise 129.1    Prove the result that we have just described for a split-
 the-pie game in which each player i’s preference relation over (X × T ) ∪
 {D} ∪ ({Out} × T ) is represented by ui where ui (x, t) = δ t xi , ui (D) = 0,
 u1 (Out, t) = 0 for all t, and u2 (Out, t) = δ t b for some b < 1 and some
 δ ∈ (0, 1).
   This result is sometimes called the “outside option principle”. It is
 not robust to the assumptions about the points at which the players
 can exercise their outside options. For example, if one of the players
 can opt out at the end of any period, not just after he rejects an offer,
 then the game has a great multiplicity of subgame perfect equilibria (see
 Shaked (1994) and Osborne and Rubinstein (1990, Section 3.12)).

 7.4.4   A Model in Which There Is a Risk of Breakdown
 Finally, consider a modification of the model of a bargaining game of
 alternating offers in which at the end of each period a chance move ends
 the game with probability α ∈ (0, 1). (We consider this case again in
 Section 15.4.) Assume that the players do not care about the time at
 which agreement is reached; the pressure on each player to reach agree-
 ment is not the player’s impatience but the risk that the negotiations will
 break down. In the extensive game (with perfect information and chance
 moves) that models this situation there are six types of history. Four of
 these types are analogs of types I through IV (see Section 7.2) in which
 each occurrence of R is replaced by (R, C), where C is the action of
 chance in which bargaining continues (rather than breaks down). A his-
 tory of type V takes the form (x0 , R, C, x1 , R, C, . . . , xt , R), after which
 it is the turn of chance to move, and a history of type VI is terminal
 and takes the form (x0 , R, C, x1 , R, C, . . . , xt , R, B), where B stands for
 breakdown. We assume that the players are indifferent among all termi-
 nal histories in which no agreement is reached (i.e. among all histories of
 types IV and VI). Given the presence of chance moves, we need to specify
 the players’ preferences over the set of lotteries over terminal histories.
 As before, we assume that these preferences depend only on the agree-
 ment finally reached (not on the path of rejected agreements). Further,
 we assume that the preference relation of each player i is represented by
 130                                               Chapter 7. Bargaining Games



 a von Neumann–Morgenstern utility function ui : X ∪ {B} → R. (Since
 histories of type IV do not occur with positive probability, whatever
 strategies the players employ, the players’ preference relations do not
 have to rank D.) Finally, we assume that ui (B) = 0, ui (x) ≥ 0 for
 all x ∈ X, and there is a unique pair (x∗ , y ∗ ) of efficient agreements
 satisfying

       u1 (y ∗ ) = (1 − α)u1 (x∗ )   and u2 (x∗ ) = (1 − α)u2 (y ∗ ).    (130.1)

 (This is so, for example, if the players are splitting a pie, ui (x1 , x2 ) =
 wi (xi ) for some increasing concave function wi , and wi (0) = 0.)
? Exercise 130.2    Prove the analog of Proposition 122.1 for the vari-
 ant of a bargaining game of alternating offers described in the previous
 paragraph.

 7.4.5     More Than Two Players
 Proposition 122.1 does not extend to the case in which there are more
 than two players, as the following three-player variant of a split-the-pie
 game (Example 120.1) demonstrates. The set of possible agreements is

         X = {(x1 , x2 , x3 ): xi ≥ 0 for i = 1, 2, 3 and x1 + x2 + x3 = 1}

 and each player i’s preferences are represented by ui (x, t) = δ t xi for
 some 0 < δ < 1. The bargaining procedure is the following. Player 1
 initially makes a proposal. A proposal x made by player j in period t
 is first considered by player j + 1 (mod 3), who may accept or reject it.
 If he accepts it, then player j + 2 (mod 3) may accept or reject it. If
 both accept it, then the game ends and x is implemented. Otherwise
 player j + 1 (mod 3) makes the next proposal, in period t + 1.
    Let 21 ≤ δ < 1. We claim that for every agreement x there is a sub-
 game perfect equilibrium in which x is accepted immediately. Such an
 equilibrium may be described in terms of four commonly-held “states”
 x, e1 , e2 , and e3 , where ei is the ith unit vector. In state y each player i
 makes the proposal y and accepts the proposal z if and only if zi ≥ δyi .
 The initial state is x. Transitions between states occur only after a pro-
 posal has been made, before the response. If, in any state y, player i
 proposes z with zi > yi then the state becomes ej , where j 6= i is the
 player with the lowest index for whom zj < 21 . Such a player j exists,
 and the requirement that δ ≥ 12 guarantees that it is optimal for him
 to reject player i’s proposal. The main force holding this equilibrium
 Notes                                                                    131



 together is that a player is rewarded for rejecting a deviant offer: after
 his rejection, he obtains all of the pie.
? Exercise 131.1    Show that if each player is restricted to use a station-
 ary strategy (in which he makes the same proposal whenever he is the
 proposer, uses the same rule to accept proposals whenever he is the first
 responder, and uses the same rule to accept proposals whenever he is
 the second responder) then the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of
 the game described above assigns the fraction δ k−1 /(1 + δ + δ 2 ) of the
 pie to player k for k = 1, 2, 3.

 Notes

 The model in this chapter is due to Rubinstein (1982), as is Proposi-
 tion 122.1. For an exposition and analysis of the model and its applica-
 tions see Osborne and Rubinstein (1990).
    Two precursors of the model that effectively restrict attention to finite-
 horizon games are found in Ståhl (1972) and Krelle (1976, pp. 607–
 632). For a discussion of time preferences see Fishburn and Rubin-
 stein (1982). The proof of Proposition 122.1 is a modification of the orig-
 inal proof of Rubinstein (1982), following the ideas of Shaked and Sut-
 ton (1984a). The material in Section 7.4.2 is discussed in Muthoo (1991)
 and van Damme, Selten, and Winter (1990). The model in Section 7.4.3,
 in which a player can opt out, was suggested by Binmore, Shaked, and
 Sutton; see for example Shaked and Sutton (1984b) and Binmore (1985).
 The model in Section 7.4.4 is discussed in Binmore, Rubinstein, and
 Wolinsky (1986). The example discussed in Section 7.4.5 is due to
 Shaked; see Osborne and Rubinstein (1990, Section 3.13) for more de-
 tail. For another interpretation of the model of a bargaining game of
 alternating offers see Rubinstein (1995).
8          Repeated Games




The model of a repeated game is designed to examine the logic of long-
term interaction. It captures the idea that a player will take into account
the effect of his current behavior on the other players’ future behavior,
and aims to explain phenomena like cooperation, revenge, and threats.

8.1   The Basic Idea

The basic idea behind the theory is illustrated by the case in which
two individuals repeatedly play the Prisoner’s Dilemma (reproduced in
Figure 134.1). Recall that this game has a unique Nash equilibrium,
in which each player chooses D; further, for each player the action D
strictly dominates the action C, so that the rationale behind the outcome
(D, D) is very strong. Despite this, both players are better off if they
“cooperate” and choose C. The main idea behind the theory of repeated
games is that if the game is played repeatedly then the mutually desirable
outcome in which (C, C) occurs in every period is stable if each player
believes that a defection will terminate the cooperation, resulting in a
subsequent loss for him that outweighs the short-term gain.
   The primary achievement of the theory is to isolate types of strategies
that support mutually desirable outcomes in any game. The theory gives
us insights into the structure of behavior when individuals interact re-
peatedly, structure that may be interpreted in terms of a “social norm”.
The results that we describe show that the social norm needed to sus-
tain mutually desirable outcomes involves each player’s “punishing” any
player whose behavior is undesirable. When we impose the requirement
embedded in the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium that threats
of punishment be credible, the social norm must also ensure that the
punishers have an incentive to carry out the threats in circumstances
134                                             Chapter 8. Repeated Games



                                   C     D

                             C    3, 3   0, 4

                             D    4, 0   1, 1

                   Figure 134.1 The Prisoner’s Dilemma.


in which the social norm requires them to do so. In this case the pre-
cise nature of the punishment depends on how the players value future
outcomes. Sometimes it is sufficient that a punishment phase last for a
limited amount of time, after which the players return to pursue the mu-
tually desirable outcome; sometimes the social norm must entail future
rewards for players who carry out costly punishments.
   Although we regard these results about the structure of the equilib-
rium strategies to be the main achievement of the theory, most of the
results in the literature focus instead on the set of payoffs that can
be sustained by equilibria, giving conditions under which this set con-
sists of nearly all reasonable payoff profiles. These “folk theorems” have
two sides. On the one hand they demonstrate that socially desirable
outcomes that cannot be sustained if players are short-sighted can be
sustained if the players have long-term objectives. On the other hand
they show that the set of equilibrium outcomes of a repeated game is
huge, so that the notion of equilibrium lacks predictive power. “Folk
theorems” are the focus of much of the formal development in this chap-
ter. Nevertheless, we stress that in our opinion the main contribution
of the theory is the discovery of interesting stable social norms (strate-
gies) that support mutually desirable payoff profiles, and not simply the
demonstration that equilibria exist that generate such profiles.


8.2   Infinitely Repeated Games vs. Finitely Repeated Games

The model of a repeated game has two versions: the horizon may be finite
or infinite. As we shall see, the results in the two cases are different. An
extreme (and far from general) case of the difference is that in which
the constituent game is the Prisoner’s Dilemma. We shall see below
that in any finite repetition of this game the only Nash equilibrium
outcome is that in which the players choose (D, D) in every period;
on the other hand, in the infinitely repeated game the set of subgame
8.2 Infinitely Repeated Games vs. Finitely Repeated Games               135



perfect equilibrium payoff profiles is huge. Thus in applying the model of
a repeated game in specific situations we may need to determine whether
a finite or infinite horizon is appropriate.
   In our view a model should attempt to capture the features of reality
that the players perceive; it should not necessarily aim to describe the
reality that an outside observer perceives, though obviously there are
links between the two perceptions. Thus the fact that a situation has
a horizon that is in some physical sense finite (or infinite) does not
necessarily imply that the best model of the situation has a finite (or
infinite) horizon. A model with an infinite horizon is appropriate if
after each period the players believe that the game will continue for an
additional period, while a model with a finite horizon is appropriate if
the players clearly perceive a well-defined final period. The fact that
players have finite lives, for example, does not imply that one should
always model their strategic interaction as a finitely repeated game. If
they play a game so frequently that the horizon approaches only very
slowly then they may ignore the existence of the horizon entirely until
its arrival is imminent, and until this point their strategic thinking may
be better captured by a game with an infinite horizon.
   ar In a situation that is objectively finite, a key criterion that deter-
mines whether we should use a model with a finite or an infinite horizon
is whether the last period enters explicitly into the players’ strategic
considerations. For this reason, even some situations that involve a
small number of repetitions are better analyzed as infinitely repeated
games. For example, when laboratory subjects are instructed to play
the Prisoner’s Dilemma twenty times with payoffs as in Figure 134.1
(interpreted as dollars), I believe that their lines of reasoning are better
modeled by an infinitely repeated game than by a 20-period repeated
game, since except very close to the end of the game they are likely to
ignore the existence of the final period.
   mjo The behavior of experimental subjects who play the Prisoner’s
Dilemma repeatedly a finite number of times is inconsistent with the
unique subgame perfect equilibrium of the finitely repeated game. The
fact that it may be consistent with some subgame perfect equilibrium of
the infinitely repeated game is uninteresting since the range of outcomes
that are so-consistent is vast. Certainly the subgame perfect equilibria
of the infinitely repeated game give no insights about the dependence of
the subjects’ behavior on the magnitude of the payoffs and the length of
the game. (For a summary of the evidence see Rapoport (1987).) The
experimental results definitely indicate that the notion of subgame per-
136                                           Chapter 8. Repeated Games



fect equilibrium in the finitely repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma does not
capture human behavior. However, this deficiency appears to have more
to do with the backwards induction inherent in the notion of subgame
perfect equilibrium than with the finiteness of the horizon per se. A
model that will give us an understanding of the facts is likely to be a
variant of the finitely repeated game; some characteristics of the equi-
libria of the infinitely repeated game may be suggestive, but this model
itself appears unpromising as an explanatory tool. Moreover, in con-
texts in which the constituent game has multiple Nash equilibria, the
equilibria of finitely repeated games correspond well with the casual ob-
servation that people act cooperatively when the horizon is distant and
opportunistically when it is near; the equilibria of infinitely repeated
games can give us no insight into such behavior. Finally, in situations
in which people’s discount factors decline to zero over time, even if they
never become zero (i.e. no fixed finite horizon is perceived), the equi-
librium outcomes have more in common with those of finitely repeated
games than with those of infinitely repeated games.
   ar In much of the existing literature the fact that the set of equi-
libria in a long finitely repeated game may be very different from the
set of equilibria of an infinite repetition of the same constituent game
is regarded as “disturbing”. In contrast, I find it attractive: the two
models capture a very realistic feature of life, namely the fact that the
existence of a prespecified finite period may crucially affect people’s be-
havior (consider the last few months of a presidency or the fact that
religions attempt to persuade their believers that there is “life after
death”).
   mjo First, for a large set of constituent games there is no discon-
tinuity between the outcomes of the associated finitely and infinitely
repeated games (see Section 8.10). Second, in some cases in which the
discontinuity does exist it is indeed unappealing. If people who are faced
with a known fixed distant horizon behave as if the horizon is infinite
then this should be the prediction of a model with a fixed finite horizon;
if it is not then doubts are raised about the plausibility of the notion of
subgame perfect equilibrium in other contexts.

8.3   Infinitely Repeated Games: Definitions

The model of an infinitely repeated game captures a situation in which
players repeatedly engage in a strategic game G, which we refer to as the
constituent game. Throughout we restrict attention to games in which
  8.3 Infinitely Repeated Games: Definitions                                                           137



  the action set of each player is compact and the preference relation of
  each player is continuous. There is no limit on the number of times that
  G is played; on each occasion the players choose their actions simulta-
  neously. When taking an action, a player knows the actions previously
  chosen by all players. We model this situation as an extensive game with
  perfect information (and simultaneous moves) as follows.
I Definition 137.1 Let G = hN, (Ai ), (%i )i be a strategic game; let
  A = ×i∈N Ai . An infinitely repeated game of G is an extensive
  game with perfect information and simultaneous moves hN, H, P, (%∗i )i
  in which
    •       H = {∅} ∪ (∪∞        t
                            t=1 A ) ∪ A
                                        ∞
                                          (where ∅ is the initial history and A∞ is
            the set of infinite sequences (at )∞
                                               t=1 of action profiles in G)
    •       P (h) = N for each nonterminal history h ∈ H
    •       %∗i is a preference relation on A∞ that extends the preference rela-
            tion %i in the sense that it satisfies the following condition of weak
            separability: if (at ) ∈ A∞ , a ∈ A, a0 ∈ A, and a %i a0 then
                   (a1 , . . . , at−1 , a, at+1 , . . .) %∗i (a1 , . . . , at−1 , a0 , at+1 , . . .)
            for all values of t.
     A history is terminal if and only if it is infinite. After any nonterminal
  history every player i ∈ N chooses an action in Ai . Thus a strategy of
  player i is a function that assigns an action in Ai to every finite sequence
  of outcomes in G.
     We now impose restrictions on the players’ preference relations in ad-
  dition to weak separability. We assume throughout that player i’s prefer-
  ence relation %∗i in the repeated game is based upon a payoff function ui
  that represents his preference relation %i in G: we assume that whether
  (at ) %∗i (bt ) depends only on the relation between the corresponding
  sequences (ui (at )) and (ui (bt )) of payoffs in G.
     We consider three forms of the preference relations, the first of which
  is defined as follows.
        •    Discounting: There is some number δ ∈ (0, 1) (the discount fac-
             tor ) such that the sequence (vit ) of real numbers is at least as good
                                                    P∞
             as the sequence (wit ) if and only if t=1 δ t−1 (vit − wit ) ≥ 0.
  According to this criterion a player evaluates a sequence (vit ) of payoffs
     P∞ t−1 t
  by   t=1 δ   vi for some discount factor δ ∈ (0, 1). (Since we have
  assumed that the values of the player’s payoffs lie in a bounded set, this
  sum is well-defined.) When the players’ preferences take this form we
138                                             Chapter 8. Repeated Games


                             PT
refer to the profile ((1 − δ) t=1 δ t−1 vit )i∈N as the payoff profile in the
repeated game associated with the sequence (v t )∞    t=1 of payoff profiles in
the constituent game.
   Preferences with discounting treat the periods differently: the value
of a given gain diminishes with time. We now specify two alternative
criteria that treat all periods symmetrically. In one criterion a player
evaluates a sequence (vit ) of payoffs essentially by its limiting average
          PT
limT →∞ t=1 vit /T . However, this limit does not always exist (the av-
erage payoff over t periods may continually oscillate as t increases); the
criterion that we discuss is defined as follows. (It is convenient to define
this criterion in terms of the strict preference relation.)
  •   Limit of means: The sequence (vit ) of real numbers is preferred to
                                                PT
      the sequence (wit ) if and only if lim inf t=1 (vit − wit )/T > 0 (i.e.
                                                 PT
      if and only if there exists  > 0 such that t=1 (vit − wit )/T >  for
      all but a finite number of periods T ).
When the players’ preferences take this form we refer to the profile
              PT
limT →∞ ( t=1 vit /T )i∈N , if it exists, as the payoff profile in the re-
peated game associated with the sequence (v t )∞      t=1 of payoff profiles in
the constituent game.
   Note that if the sequence (vit ) is preferred to the sequence (wit ) accord-
ing to the limit of means then there is a discount factor δ close enough
to 1 such that (vit ) is preferred to (wit ) by the discounting criterion.
   Under the discounting criterion a change in the payoff in a single
period can matter, whereas under the limit of means criterion payoff
differences in any finite number of periods do not matter. A player whose
preferences satisfy the limit of means is ready to sacrifice any loss in the
first finite number of periods in order to increase the stream of payoffs
he eventually obtains. For example, the stream (0, . . . , 0, 2, 2, . . .) of
payoffs is preferred by the limit of means criterion to the constant stream
(1, 1, . . .) independent of the index of the period in which the player first
gets 2 in the first stream. At first sight this property may seem strange.
However, it is not difficult to think of situations in which decision makers
put overwhelming emphasis on the long run at the expense of the short
run (think of nationalist struggles).
   We now introduce a criterion that treats all periods symmetrically
and puts emphasis on the long run but at the same time is sensitive to
a change in payoff in a single period. (Again we define the criterion in
terms of the strict preference relation.)
 8.3 Infinitely Repeated Games: Definitions                                   139


    •   Overtaking: The sequence (vit ) is preferred to the sequence (wit )
                              PT
        if and only if lim inf t=1 (vit − wit ) > 0.
    The following examples illustrate some of the differences between the
 three criteria. The sequence (1, −1, 0, 0, . . .) is preferred for any δ ∈ (0, 1)
 by the discounting criterion to the sequence (0, 0, . . .), but according
 to the other two criteria the two sequences are indifferent. The se-
 quence (−1, 2, 0, 0, . . .) is preferred to the sequence (0, 0, . . .) according
 to the overtaking criterion, but the two sequences are indifferent ac-
 cording to the limit of means. The sequence (0, . . . , 0, 1, 1, . . .) in which
 M zeros are followed by a constant sequence of 1’s is preferred by the
 limit of means to (1, 0, 0, . . .) for every value of M , but for every δ
 there exists M ∗ large enough that for all M > M ∗ the latter is pre-
 ferred to the former according to the discounting criterion for that value
 of δ.
    Let G = hN, (Ai ), (%i )i be a strategic game and for each i ∈ N let ui
 be a payoff function that represents %i . We define the δ-discounted in-
 finitely repeated game of hN, (Ai ), (ui )i to be the infinitely repeated
 game for which the constituent game is G and the preference ordering
 %∗i of each player i ∈ N is derived from the payoff function ui using
 the discounting criterion with a discount factor of δ for each player.
 Similarly we define the limit of means infinitely repeated game
 of hN, (Ai ), (ui )i and the overtaking infinitely repeated game of
 hN, (Ai ), (ui )i.
    We denote by u(a) the profile (ui (a))i∈N . Define a vector v ∈ RN
 to be a payoff profile of hN, (Ai ), (ui )i if there is an outcome a ∈
 A for which v = u(a). We refer to a vector v ∈ RN as a feasible
 payoff profile of hN, (Ai ), (ui )i if it is a convex combination of payoff
                                              P
 profiles of outcomes in A: that is, if v = a∈A αa u(a) for some collection
                                                             P
 (αa )a∈A of nonnegative rational numbers αa with a∈A αa = 1. (In
 the literature the coefficients αa are allowed to be any real numbers,
 not necessarily rational, a generalization that complicates the argument
 while adding little substance.) Note that a feasible payoff profile of
 hN, (Ai ), (ui )i is not necessarily a payoff profile of hN, (Ai ), (ui )i.
? Exercise 139.1    Consider an infinitely repeated game in which the
 players’ preferences are derived from their payoffs in the constituent
 game using different discount factors. Show that a payoff profile in such
 a repeated game may not be a feasible payoff profile of the constituent
 game.
140                                            Chapter 8. Repeated Games



8.4    Strategies as Machines

As we discussed in the introduction to this chapter, the main achieve-
ment of the theory of repeated games is to give us insights into the
structure of behavior when individuals interact repeatedly. In this sec-
tion we develop a language in which to describe conveniently the struc-
ture of the equilibria that we find. We begin by defining a machine,
which is intended as an abstraction of the process by which a player
implements a strategy in a repeated game. A machine (or automa-
ton) for player i in an infinitely repeated game of hN, (Ai ), (%i )i has the
following components.
  •   A set Qi (the set of states).
  •   An element qi0 ∈ Qi (the initial state).
  •   A function fi : Qi → Ai that assigns an action to every state (the
      output function).
  •   A function τi : Qi × A → Qi that assigns a state to every pair con-
      sisting of a state and an action profile (the transition function).
The set Qi is unrestricted. The names of the states do not of course
have any significance (the fact that we call a state “cooperative”, for
example, does not mean that the behavior associated with it matches
its name). In the first period the state of the machine is qi0 and the
machine chooses the action fi (qi0 ). Whenever the machine is in some
state qi , it chooses the action fi (qi ) corresponding to that state. The
transition function τi specifies how the machine moves from one state to
another: if the machine is in state qi and a is the action profile chosen
then its state changes to τi (qi , a).
   Note that the input of the transition function consists of the current
state and the profile of all the players’ current actions. It is more natural
to take as the input the current state and the list of actions chosen by the
other players. This fits the natural description of a “rule of behavior” or
“strategy” as a plan of how to behave in all possible circumstances that
are consistent with one’s plans. However, since the game-theoretic defi-
nition requires that a strategy specify an action for all possible histories,
including those that are inconsistent with the player’s own strategy, we
have to include as an input into the transition function the action of the
player himself.
   To illustrate the concept of a machine we now give four examples of
machines for a player in the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma (Figure 134.1).
  8.4 Strategies as Machines                                                     141

                                                      
                              {(C, C)}
                       ?                                all outcomes
                                                    ?
                       C: C                       - D: D
                                  all outcomes
                                  except (C, C)

  Figure 141.1 A machine that corresponds to the grim strategy in the Prisoner’s
  Dilemma.
                                                                  
           ? {(·, D)}                                      all outcomes
        P0 : C      - P1 : D        - P2 : D        - P3 : D
                                all             all
         6 {(·, C)}          outcomes        outcomes

  Figure 141.2 The machine M1 . This machine for player 1 in the Prisoner’s
  Dilemma plays C as long as player 2 does so and punishes player 2 for choosing D
  by choosing D for three periods. (We use {(·, X)} to denote the set of all outcomes
  in which player 2’s action is X.)


 Example 141.1 (A machine for the “grim” strategy) The machine
  hQi , qi0 , fi , τi i defined as follows is the simplest one that carries out the
  (“grim”) strategy that chooses C so long as both players have chosen C
  in every period in the past, and otherwise chooses D.
    •   Qi = {C, D}.
    •   qi0 = C.
    •   fi (C) = C and fi (D) = D.
    •   τi (C, (C, C)) = C and τi (X , (Y, Z)) = D if (X , (Y, Z)) 6= (C, (C, C)).
  This machine is illustrated in Figure 141.1. Each box corresponds to a
  state; inside each box is the name of the state followed (after the colon)
  by the action that the machine takes in that state. The box with the
  heavy boundary corresponds to the initial state. The arrows correspond
  to the transitions; adjacent to each arrow is the set of outcomes that
  induces the transition.
 Example 141.2 The machine M1 of player 1 shown in Figure 141.2
  plays C as long as player 2 plays C; it plays D for three periods, and
  then reverts back to C, if player 2 plays D when he should play C.
  (We can think of the other player being “punished” for three periods for
  playing D, and then “forgiven”.) Notice that a machine must have at
  least four states in order to carry out this strategy.
 Example 141.3 The machine M2 of player 2 shown in Figure 142.1
  starts by playing C and continues to do so if the other player chooses D.
142                                             Chapter 8. Repeated Games

                                                
                                                {(D, ·)}
                         ?   {(C, ·)}
                      R0 : C          - R1 : D
                       6 {(D, ·)}        6 {(C, ·)}

Figure 142.1 The machine M2 . This machine for player 2 in the Prisoner’s
Dilemma starts by playing C but switches to D if player 1 chooses C, returning
to C only if player 1 chooses D.


        period    state of M1     state of M2    outcome      payoffs
          1            P0              R0         (C, C)       3, 3
          2            P0              R1         (C, D)       0, 4
          3            P1              R1         (D, D)       1, 1
          4            P2              R0         (D, C)       4, 0
          5            P3              R0         (D, C)       4, 0
          6            P0              R0         (C, C)       3, 3

Figure 142.2 The outcomes in the first six periods of the repeated Prisoner’s
Dilemma when player 1 uses the machine M1 in Figure 141.2 and player 2 uses the
machine M2 in Figure 142.1.


If the other player chooses C then it switches to D, which it continues to
play until the other player again chooses D, when it reverts to playing C.
   To illustrate the evolution of play in a repeated game when each
player’s strategy is carried out by a machine, suppose that player 1
uses the machine M1 and player 2 uses the machine M2 in the repeated
Prisoner’s Dilemma.
   The machines start in the states P0 and R0 respectively. The outcome
in the first period is (C, C) since the output function of M1 assigns the
action C to state P0 and the output function of M2 assigns the action
C to state R0 . The states in the following period are determined by the
transition functions. The transition function of M1 leaves the machine
in state P0 , since the outcome in the first period is (C, C), while the
transition function of M2 moves the machine from R0 to R1 in response
to this input. Thus the pair of states in period 2 is (P0 , R1 ). The output
functions determine the outcome in period 2 to be (C, D), so that M1
now moves from P0 to P1 while M2 stays in R1 . Play continues through
period 5 as in the table in Figure 142.2. In period 6 the pair of states
is the same as it is in period 1; subsequently the states and outcomes
cycle, following the pattern in the first five periods. The fact that cycles
are generated is not peculiar to this example: whenever each player
 8.5 Trigger Strategies: Nash Folk Theorems                                  143



 uses a machine with finitely many states a cycle is eventually reached,
 though not necessarily in period 1. (This follows from the fact that each
 machine takes as its input only the actions in the previous period (i.e.
 it is “Markovian”).)
? Exercise 143.1 Show that not every strategy in an infinitely repeated
 game can be executed by a machine with a finite number of states.

 8.5   Trigger Strategies: Nash Folk Theorems

 We now study the set of Nash equilibrium outcomes of an infinitely re-
 peated game. We show that this set includes outcomes that are not
 repetitions of Nash equilibria of the constituent game. To support such
 an outcome, each player must be deterred from deviating by being “pun-
 ished”. Such punishment may take many forms. One possibility is that
 each player uses a “trigger strategy”: any deviation causes him to carry
 out a punitive action that lasts forever. In the equilibria that we study
 in this section each player uses such a strategy.
    Let hN, (Ai ), (%i )i be a strategic game and for each i ∈ N let ui be a
 payoff function that represents the preference ordering %i . Recall that
 we define a feasible payoff profile of G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i to be a convex
               P
 combination a∈A αa u(a) for which the coefficients αa are rational. Let
       P
 w = a∈A αa u(a) be such a profile and suppose that αa = βa /γ for
                                                        P
 each a ∈ A, where every βa is an integer and γ = a∈A βa . Then the
 sequence of outcomes in the repeated game that consists of an indefinite
 repetition of a cycle of length γ in which each a ∈ A is played for βa
 periods yields an average payoff profile over the cycle, and hence in the
 entire repeated game, of w.
    Define player i’s minmax payoff in G, henceforth denoted vi , to be
 the lowest payoff that the other players can force upon player i:

                        vi =     min    max ui (a−i , ai ).              (143.2)
                               a−i ∈A−i ai ∈Ai

 A payoff profile w for which wi ≥ vi for all i ∈ N is called enforce-
 able; if wi > vi for all i ∈ N then w is strictly enforceable.1 If
 a ∈ A is an outcome of G for which u(a) is (strictly) enforceable in G
 then we refer to a as a (strictly) enforceable outcome of G. De-
 note by p−i ∈ A−i one of the solutions of the minimization problem
 on the right-hand side of (143.2). For each action profile a ∈ A let
    1 In much of the literature the term individually rational is used instead of

 “enforceable”.
 144                                            Chapter 8. Repeated Games



 bi (a−i ) ∈ Ai be an action of player i in G that is a best response to a−i
 (i.e. bi (a−i ) ∈ Bi (a−i )). (Notice that p−i and the function bi depend
 only on the players’ preferences over A, not on the payoff representations
 of these preferences.) The collection of actions p−i is the most severe
 “punishment” that the other players can inflict upon player i in G.
 (Note that we restrict punishments to be deterministic. In some of the
 literature punishers are allowed to randomize, possibly correlating their
 actions over time; this changes the set of feasible payoff profiles and the
 enforceable payoffs but not the structure of the set of equilibria of the
 repeated game.)
     In the next two results we show that the set of Nash equilibrium pay-
 off profiles of an infinitely repeated game in which the players evaluate
 streams of payoffs by the limit of means is the set of all feasible enforce-
 able payoff profiles of the constituent game. The third result shows that
 the same is approximately true when the players discount future payoffs
 using a discount factor close to 1.
 Proposition 144.1 Every Nash equilibrium payoff profile of the limit of
 means infinitely repeated game of G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i is an enforceable
 payoff profile of G. The same is true, for any δ ∈ (0, 1), of every Nash
 equilibrium payoff profile of the δ-discounted infinitely repeated game
 of G.
 Proof. Suppose that w is a payoff profile of the limit of means infinitely
 repeated game of G that is not enforceable; suppose that wi < vi . Then
 w is not a Nash equilibrium payoff profile of the repeated game, because
 for any strategy profile s the strategy s0i of player i defined by s0i (h) =
 bi (s−i (h)) for each history h gives player i a payoff of at least vi in
 each period. The same argument applies to any δ-discounted infinitely
 repeated game of G.                                                        2
    The following exercise asks you to express the strategy s0i of player i
 in this proof in the language of machines that we developed in Sec-
 tion 8.4.
? Exercise 144.2    Consider a two-player infinitely repeated game. For
 any given machine for player 2 construct a machine for player 1 that
 yields her a payoff of at least v1 .

 Proposition 144.3 (Nash folk theorem for the limit of means criterion)
 Every feasible enforceable payoff profile of G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i is a Nash
 equilibrium payoff profile of the limit of means infinitely repeated game
 of G.
 8.5 Trigger Strategies: Nash Folk Theorems                              145


                   P
 Proof. Let w = a∈A (βa /γ)u(a) be a feasible enforceable payoff profile,
 where βa for each a ∈ A is an integer and γ = a∈A βa , and let (at ) be
                                                   P

 the cycling sequence of action profiles for which the cycle (of length γ)
 contains βa repetitions of a for each a ∈ A. Let si be the strategy of
 player i in the repeated game that chooses ati in each period t unless there
 was a previous period t0 in which a single player other than i deviated
         0
 from at , in which case it chooses (p−j )i , where j is the deviant in the
 first such period t0 . The strategy profile s is a Nash equilibrium of the
 repeated game since a player j who deviates receives at most his minmax
 payoff vj in every subsequent period; the payoff profile generated by s
 is w.                                                                     2
? Exercise 145.1     Construct a machine that executes the equilibrium
 strategy si of player i in this proof.
   The strategy si in this proof is a trigger strategy. Many other strategies
 can be used to prove the result (for example the strategy used in the
 proof of Proposition 146.2).
   The following is an analog of Proposition 144.3 for an infinitely re-
 peated game with discounting. The proof is similar to that of the
 previous result; we leave it to you.
 Proposition 145.2 (Nash folk theorem for the discounting criterion)
 Let w be a strictly enforceable feasible payoff profile of G = hN, (Ai ),
 (ui )i. For all  > 0 there exists δ < 1 such that if δ > δ then the δ-
 discounted infinitely repeated game of G has a Nash equilibrium whose
 payoff profile w0 satisfies |w0 − w| < .
    To illuminate the character of equilibria in which each player uses a
 trigger strategy, consider two infinitely repeated games: one in which the
 constituent game is the Prisoner’s Dilemma, which we denote G1 (see
 Figure 134.1), and the other in which the constituent game is the game
 G2 shown in Figure 146.1. In both G1 and G2 each player’s minmax
 payoff is 1 and by playing D each player holds the other’s payoff to this
 level (p−1 = p−2 = D).
    In both games the trigger strategies used in the proof of Proposi-
 tion 144.3 involve each player switching to D for good in response to
 any deviation from the equilibrium path. In G1 the action D dominates
 the action C, so that it is a stable order for each player to choose D.
 Thus there is some rationale for a punisher who believes that a deviation
 signals the end of the current stable order to choose the action D in the
 future. By contrast, in G2 a constant repetition of (D, D) is not a stable
 146                                             Chapter 8. Repeated Games



                                    A     D

                               A   2, 3   1, 5

                              D    0, 1   0, 1

                         Figure 146.1 The game G2 .


 order since A strictly dominates D for player 1. Thus player 1 suffers
 from the punishment he inflicts on his opponent, making incredible his
 threat to punish a deviation and casting doubt on the plausibility of
 equilibria in which such trigger strategies are employed. We are led to
 study the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium, which rules out such
 strategies since it requires that each player’s behavior after every history
 be optimal.
? Exercise 146.1    Consider the infinitely repeated game in which the
 players’ preferences are represented by the discounting criterion, the
 common discount factor is 21 , and the constituent game is the game G2
 in Figure 146.1. Show that ((A, A), (A, A), . . .) is not a subgame perfect
 equilibrium outcome path.

 8.6   Punishing for a Limited Length of Time: A Perfect Folk
       Theorem for the Limit of Means Criterion

 The strategies used in the proof of Proposition 144.3 to generate an
 arbitrary enforceable payoff profile punish a deviant indefinitely. Such
 punishment is unnecessarily harsh: a deviant’s payoff needs to be held
 down to the minmax level only for enough periods to wipe out his (one-
 period) gain from the deviation. If the players’ preferences satisfy the
 limit of means criterion then a strategy that returns to the equilibrium
 path after the punishment has the advantage that it yields the same
 payoff for the punishers as does the equilibrium path itself, so that the
 players have no reason not to adopt it. Hence under the limit of means
 criterion the social norm of punishing for only a finite number of periods
 is a subgame perfect equilibrium of the infinitely repeated game.
 Proposition 146.2 (Perfect folk theorem for the limit of means crite-
 rion) Every feasible strictly enforceable payoff profile of G = hN, (Ai ),
 (ui )i is a subgame perfect equilibrium payoff profile of the limit of means
 infinitely repeated game of G.
8.6 A Perfect Folk Theorem for the Limit of Means Criterion                  147


                 P
Proof. Let w = a∈A (βa /γ)u(a) be a feasible strictly enforceable pay-
off profile of G and let (ak )γk=1 be the sequence of action profiles that
consists of βa repetitions of a for each a ∈ A.
   We now construct a strategy profile that generates a sequence of action
profiles in G consisting of an indefinite repetition of the cycle (ak )γk=1 .
Each player punishes any deviation for only a limited number of periods.
It is convenient to specify the strategy of each player so that any pun-
ishment begins only in the period that follows the completion of a cycle.
If a single player deviates in some period in which nobody deserves to
be punished then that player, say i, is declared to deserve punishment;
beginning in the first period of the next cycle the other players punish
i by choosing p−i for enough periods to cancel out any possible gain for
him. Subsequently the punishers return to the equilibrium, starting at
the beginning of a cycle. (Simultaneous deviations by more than one
player are ignored.) Given that the players’ preferences satisfy the limit
of means criterion, the payoff profile is w after every possible history.
   To define the strategies precisely let g ∗ be the maximal amount that
any player can gain by deviating from any action profile in G. That is,
let g ∗ be the maximum of ui (a−i , a0i ) − ui (a) over all i ∈ N , a0i ∈ Ai and
a ∈ A. Since wi > vi there exists an integer m∗ ≥ 1 that is an integral
multiple of γ such that γg ∗ + m∗ vi ≤ m∗ wi for all i ∈ N . The strategy
of each player i punishes any deviant for m∗ periods and is given by the
following machine.
  •   Set of states: {(Norm k , d): either k = 1 and d = 0 or 2 ≤ k ≤
      γ and d ∈ {0} ∪ N } ∪ {P (j, t): j ∈ N and 1 ≤ t ≤ m∗ }. (The state
      (Norm k , 0) means that we are in the kth period of the cycle and no
      player deserves punishment. The state (Norm k , j) means that we
      are in the kth period of the cycle and player j deserves punishment.
      The state P (j, t) means that player j is being punished and there
      are t periods left in which he has to be punished.)
  •   Initial state: (Norm 1 , 0).
  •   Output function: In (Norm k , d) for any d ∈ {0} ∪ N choose aki ; in
      P (j, t) choose (p−j )i if i 6= j and bi (p−i ) if i = j.
  •   Transition function:
       ◦   From (Norm k , d) move to2 (Norm k+1 (mod γ) , d) unless:
   2 We define m (mod γ) to be the integer q with 1 ≤ q ≤ γ satisfying m = `γ + q

for some integer ` (so that, in particular, γ (mod γ) = γ).
  148                                             Chapter 8. Repeated Games



             · d = 0 and player j alone deviated from ak , in which case
               move to (Norm k+1 , j) if k ≤ γ − 1 and to P (j, m∗ ) if k = γ.
             · d = j 6= 0, in which case move to (Norm k+1 , j) if k ≤ γ − 1
               and to P (j, m∗ ) if k = γ.
        ◦   From P (j, t) move to P (j, t−1) if 2 ≤ t ≤ m∗ , and to (Norm 1 , 0)
            if t = 1.
  We leave it to you to verify that the strategy profile thus defined is a
  subgame perfect equilibrium.                                          2
     The strategies that we define in this proof do not initiate punishment
  immediately after a deviation, but wait until the end of a cycle before
  doing so. We define the strategies in this way in order to calculate easily
  the length of punishment necessary to deter a deviation: if punishment
  were to begin immediately after a deviation then we would have to take
  into account, when we calculated the length of the required punishment,
  the possibility that a deviant’s payoffs in the remainder of the cycle are
  low, so that he has an additional gain from terminating the cycle.
? Exercise 148.1 (A game with both long- and short-lived players)   Con-
  sider an infinite horizon extensive game in which the strategic game G
  is played between player 1 and an infinite sequence of players, each of
  whom lives for only one period and is informed of the actions taken in
  every previous period. Player 1 evaluates sequences of payoffs by the
  limit of means, and each of the other players is interested only in the
  payoff that he gets in the single period in which he lives.
   a. Find the set of subgame perfect equilibria of the game when G is the
      Prisoner’s Dilemma (see Figure 134.1).
   b. Show that when G is the modification of the Prisoner’s Dilemma in
      which the payoff to player 2 of (C, D) is 0 then for every rational
      number x ∈ [1, 3] there is a subgame perfect equilibrium in which
      player 1’s average payoff is x.
     Consider the infinitely repeated game for which the constituent game
  is given in Figure 146.1. In this game v1 = v2 = 1. Consider the strategy
  profile defined in the proof of Proposition 146.2 to support the sequence
  (at ) of outcomes in which at = (A, A) for all t that takes the following
  form: each player chooses A in every period (the cycle is of length one)
  unless the other player deviated in the previous period, in which case he
  chooses D for m∗ = 2 periods and then reverts to A.
     This strategy profile is not a subgame perfect equilibrium of the in-
  finitely repeated game when the players’ preferences are represented by
8.7 A Perfect Folk Theorem for the Overtaking Criterion                    149



either the overtaking criterion or the discounting criterion. After a de-
viation by player 2, each player is supposed to choose D for two periods
before reverting to A. Player 1 would be better off choosing A than pun-
ishing player 2, since the sequence of payoffs (1, 1, 2, 2, . . .) is preferred
under both criteria to the sequence (0, 0, 2, 2, . . .). (The two sequences
are indifferent under the limit of means criterion.) To support the path
in which the outcome is (A, A) in every period as a subgame perfect
equilibrium, player 2 has to punish player 1 if player 1 does not fulfill
her obligations to punish player 2. Further, player 2 has to be punished
if he does not punish player 1 for not punishing player 2, and so on.
In the next two sections we use strategies with these features to prove
perfect folk theorems when the players’ preferences are represented by
the overtaking and discounting criteria.

8.7    Punishing the Punisher: A Perfect Folk Theorem for the
       Overtaking Criterion

The next result is an analog of Proposition 146.2 for the overtaking
criterion; it shows how strategies different from those used to prove
the perfect folk theorem for the limit of means criterion can support
desirable outcomes when the players’ preferences are represented by the
overtaking criterion. For simplicity we construct a strategy profile only
for the case in which the equilibrium path consists of the repetition of a
single (strictly enforceable) outcome.
Proposition 149.1 (Perfect folk theorem for the overtaking criterion)
For any strictly enforceable outcome a∗ of G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i there is
a subgame perfect equilibrium of the overtaking infinitely repeated game
of G that generates the path (at ) in which at = a∗ for all t.
Proof. Let M be the maximum of ui (a) over all i ∈ N and a ∈ A.
Consider the strategy profile in which each player i uses the following
machine.
  •   Set of states: {Norm} ∪ {P (j, t): j ∈ N and t is a positive integer}.
      (In the state P (j, t) player j deserves to be punished for t periods
      more.)
  •   Initial state: Norm.
  •   Output function: In Norm choose a∗i . In P (j, t) choose (p−j )i if
      i 6= j and bi (p−i ) if i = j.
  •   Transitions in response to an outcome a ∈ A:
150                                              Chapter 8. Repeated Games


      ◦   From Norm stay in Norm unless for some player j we have
          a−j = a∗−j and aj 6= a∗j (i.e. j is the only deviant from a∗ ), in
          which case move to P (j, t), where t is the smallest integer such
          that M + tvj < (t + 1)uj (a∗ ).
      ◦   From P (j, t):
           · If a−j = p−j or a` 6= (p−j )` for at least two players ` (i.e. all
             punishers punish or at least two do not do so) then move to
             P (j, t − 1) if t ≥ 2 and to Norm if t = 1.
           · If a−j 6= p−j and a` = (p−j )` if ` 6= j ∗ (i.e. j ∗ is the only
             punisher who does not punish) then move to P (j ∗ , T (j, t)),
             where T (j, t) is large enough that the sum of j ∗ ’s payoff in
             state P (j, t) and his payoff in the subsequent T (j, t) periods
             if he does not deviate is greater than his payoff in the de-
             viation plus T (j, t)vj ∗ . (Such a number T (j, t) exists since
             after t periods the players were supposed to go back to the
             equilibrium outcome a∗ and uj ∗ (a∗ ) > vj ∗ .)
   Under this strategy profile any attempt by a player to increase his
payoff by a unilateral deviation after any history, including one after
which punishment is supposed to occur, is offset by the other players’
subsequent punishment. Again we leave it to you to verify that the
strategy profile is a subgame perfect equilibrium.                   2


8.8   Rewarding Players Who Punish: A Perfect Folk
      Theorem for the Discounting Criterion

The strategy profile defined in the proof of Proposition 149.1, in which
players are punished for failing to mete out the punishment that they
are assigned, may fail to be a subgame perfect equilibrium when the
players’ preferences are represented by the discounting criterion. The
reason is as follows. Under the strategy profile a player who fails to
participate in a punishment that was supposed to last, say, t periods is
himself punished for, say, t∗ periods, where t∗ may be much larger than
t. Further deviations may require even longer punishments, with the
result that the strategies should be designed to carry out punishments
that are unboundedly long. However slight the discounting, there may
thus be some punishment that results in losses that can never be recov-
ered. Consequently, the strategy profile may not be a subgame perfect
equilibrium if the players’ preferences are represented by the discounting
criterion.
8.8 A Perfect Folk Theorem for the Discounting Criterion                151



   To establish an analog to Proposition 149.1 for the case that the play-
ers’ preferences are represented by the discounting criterion, we con-
struct a new strategy. In this strategy players who punish deviants as
the strategy dictates are subsequently rewarded, making it worthwhile
for them to complete their assignments. As in the previous section we
construct a strategy profile only for the case in which the equilibrium
path consists of the repetition of a single (strictly enforceable) outcome.
The result requires a restriction on the set of games that is usually called
full dimensionality.
Proposition 151.1 (Perfect folk theorem for the discounting criterion)
Let a∗ be a strictly enforceable outcome of G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i. Assume
that there is a collection (a(i))i∈N of strictly enforceable outcomes of G
such that for every player i ∈ N we have a∗ i a(i) and a(j) i a(i)
for all j ∈ N \ {i}. Then there exists δ < 1 such that for all δ >
δ there is a subgame perfect equilibrium of the δ-discounted infinitely
repeated game of G that generates the path (at ) in which at = a∗ for
all t.
Proof. The strategy profile in which each player uses the following ma-
chine is a subgame perfect equilibrium that supports the outcome a∗
in every period. The machine has three types of states. In state C(0)
the action profile chosen by the players is a∗ . For each j ∈ N the
state C(j) is a state of “reconciliation” that is entered after any pun-
ishment of player j is complete; in this state the action profile that is
chosen is a(j). For each player j and period t between 1 and some
number L that we specify later, the state P (j, t) is one in which there
remain t periods in which player j is supposed to be punished; in this
state every player i other than j takes the action (p−j )i , which holds
j down to his minmax payoff. If any player i deviates in any state
there is a transition to the state P (i, L) (that is, the other players plan
to punish player i for L periods). If in none of the L periods of pun-
ishment there is a deviation by a single punisher the state changes to
C(i). The set {C(i)} of states serves as a system that punishes play-
ers who misbehave during a punishment phase: if player i does not
punish player j as he is supposed to, then instead of the state be-
coming C(j), in which the outcome is a(j), player i is punished for
L periods, after which the state becomes C(i), in which the outcome is
a(i) ≺i a(j).
   To summarize, the machine of player i is defined as follows, where for
convenience we write a(0) = a∗ ; we specify L later.
 152                                                        Chapter 8. Repeated Games


    •   Set of states: {C(j): j ∈ {0} ∪ N } ∪ {P (j, t): j ∈ N and 1 ≤ t ≤ L}.
    •   Initial state: C(0).
    •   Output function: In C(j) choose (a(j))i . In P (j, t) choose (p−j )i if
        i 6= j and bi (p−i ) if i = j.
    •   Transitions in response to an outcome a ∈ A:
         ◦    From C(j) stay in C(j) unless a single player k deviated from
              a(j), in which case move to P (k, L).
         ◦    From P (j, t):
               · If a single player k 6= j deviated from p−j then move to
                 P (k, L).
               · Otherwise move to P (j, t − 1) if t ≥ 2 and to C(j) if t = 1.
   We now specify the values of δ and L. As before, let M be the
 maximum of ui (a) over all i ∈ N and a ∈ A. We choose L and δ
 to be large enough that all possible deviations are deterred. To deter a
 deviation of any player in any state C(j) we take L large enough that
 M − ui (a(j)) < L(ui (a(j)) − vi ) for all i ∈ N and all j ∈ {0} ∪ N and
 choose δ > δ ∗ where δ ∗ is close enough to 1 that for all δ > δ ∗ we have
                                           L+1
                                           X
                         M − ui (a(j)) <         δ k−1 (ui (a(j)) − vi ).
                                           k=2

 (This condition is sufficient since ui (a(j)) > ui (a(i)) for j 6= i.) If a
 player i deviates from P (j, t) for j 6= i then he obtains at most M
 in the period that he deviates followed by L periods of vi < ui (a(i))
 and ui (a(i)) subsequently. If he does not deviate then he obtains
 ui (p−j , bj (p−j )) for between 1 and L periods and ui (a(j)) subsequently.
 Thus to deter a deviation it is sufficient to choose δ > δ ∗ close enough
 to one that for all δ > δ we have
    L
    X                                               ∞
                                                    X
              k−1
          δ         (M − ui (p−j , bj (p−j ))) <           δ k−1 (ui (a(j)) − ui (a(i))).
    k=1                                            k=L+1

 (Such a value of δ exists because of our assumption that ui (a(j)) >
 ui (a(i)) if i 6= j.)                                              2
? Exercise 152.1    Consider the three-player symmetric infinitely repeated
 game in which each player’s preferences are represented by the discount-
 ing criterion and the constituent game is h{1, 2, 3}, (Ai ), (ui )i where
 for i = 1, 2, 3 we have Ai = [0, 1] and ui (a1 , a2 , a3 ) = a1 a2 a3 +
 (1 − a1 )(1 − a2 )(1 − a3 ) for all (a1 , a2 , a3 ) ∈ A1 × A2 × A3 .
 8.9 Subgame Perfect Equilibria Under the Discounting Criterion          153



  a. Find the set of enforceable payoffs of the constituent game.
  b. Show that for any discount factor δ ∈ (0, 1) the payoff of any player in
     any subgame perfect equilibrium of the repeated game is at least 14 .
  c. Reconcile these results with Proposition 151.1.

 8.9   The Structure of Subgame Perfect Equilibria Under the
       Discounting Criterion

 The strategy of each player in the equilibrium constructed in the proof
 of Proposition 151.1, which concerns games in which the discount factor
 is close to 1, has the special feature that when any player deviates,
 the subsequent sequence of action profiles depends only on the identity
 of the deviant and not on the history that preceded the deviation. In
 this section we show that for any common discount factor a profile of
 such strategies can be found to support any subgame perfect equilibrium
 outcome.
    We begin with two lemmas, the first of which extends the one deviation
 property proved for finite extensive games in Lemma 98.2 to infinitely
 repeated games with discounting.
 Lemma 153.1 A strategy profile is a subgame perfect equilibrium of the
 δ-discounted infinitely repeated game of G if and only if no player can
 gain by deviating in a single period after any history.
? Exercise 153.2    Prove this result.
   The next result shows that under our assumptions the set of subgame
 perfect equilibrium payoff profiles of any δ-discounted infinitely repeated
 game is closed.
 Lemma 153.3 Let (wk )∞  k=1 be a sequence of subgame perfect equilibrium
 payoff profiles of the δ-discounted infinitely repeated game of G that
 converges to w∗ . Then w∗ is a subgame perfect equilibrium payoff profile
 of this repeated game.
 Proof. For each value of k let sk be a subgame perfect equilibrium of
 the repeated game that generates the payoff profile wk . We construct
 a strategy profile s that we show is a subgame perfect equilibrium and
 yields the payoff profile w∗ . We define, by induction on the length of
 the history h, an action profile s(h) of G and an auxiliary infinite sub-
 sequence (rk ) of the sequence (sk ) that has the property that the payoff
 profile generated by the members of the subsequence in the subgame
 following the history h has a limit and the action profile rk (h) converges
154                                                Chapter 8. Repeated Games



to s(h). Assume we have done so for all histories of length T or less,
and consider a history (h, a) of length T + 1, where h is a history of
length T . Let (rk ) be the sequence of strategy profiles that we chose for
the history h and let s(h) be the action profile we chose for that his-
tory. For a = s(h) select for (h, a) a subsequence (r0k ) of (rk ) for which
the sequence (r0k (h, a)) converges, and let the action profile to which
r0k (h, a) converges be s(h, a). Obviously the limiting payoff profile of
the subsequence that we have chosen is the same as that of (rk ). For
a 6= s(h) choose for (h, a) a subsequence (r00k ) of (r0k ) for which the
sequence of payoff profiles and the sequence (r00k (h, a)) both converge,
and let the action profile to which r00k (h, a) converges be s(h, a).
   No player i can gain in deviating from si by changing his action after
the history h and inducing some outcome a instead of s(h) since if this
were so then for large enough k he could profitably deviate from rik ,
where (rk ) is the sequence that we chose for the history (h, a). Further,
the payoff profile of s is w∗ .                                            2
  By this result the set of subgame perfect equilibrium payoffs of any
player i in the repeated game is closed; since it is bounded it has a min-
imum, which we denote m(i). Let (a(i)t ) be the outcome of a subgame
perfect equilibrium in which player i’s payoff is m(i).
Proposition 154.1 Let (at ) be the outcome of a subgame perfect equi-
librium of the δ-discounted infinitely repeated game of G = hN, (Ai ),
(ui )i. Then the strategy profile in which each player i uses the following
machine is a subgame perfect equilibrium with the same outcome (at ).
 •    Set of states: {Norm t : t is a positive integer} ∪ {P (j, t): j ∈ N and t
       is a positive integer}.
 •    Initial state: Norm1 .
 •    Output function: In state Normt play ati . In state P (j, t) play a(j)ti .
 •    Transition function:
       ◦   In state Normt move to Normt+1 unless exactly one player, say
           j, deviated from at , in which case move to P (j, 1).
       ◦   In state P (j, t): Move to P (j, t + 1) unless exactly one player, say
           j 0 , deviated from a(j)t , in which case move to P (j 0 , 1).
Proof. It is straightforward to verify, using Lemma 153.1, that this
defines a subgame perfect equilibrium with the required property. 2
8.10 Finitely Repeated Games                                              155



8.10     Finitely Repeated Games

8.10.1   Definition
We now turn to a study of finitely repeated games. The formal descrip-
tion of a finitely repeated game is very similar to that of an infinitely
repeated game: for any positive integer T a T -period finitely repeated
game of the strategic game hN, (Ai ), (%i )i is an extensive game with per-
fect information that satisfies the conditions in Definition 137.1 when the
symbol ∞ is replaced by T . We restrict attention to the case in which
the preference relation %∗i of each player i in the finitely repeated game
is represented by the function ΣTt=1 ui (at )/T , where ui is a payoff func-
tion that represents i’s preferences in the constituent game. We refer to
this game as the T -period repeated game of hN, (Ai ), (ui )i.

8.10.2   Nash Equilibrium
The intuitive argument that drives the folk theorems for infinitely re-
peated games is that a mutually desirable outcome can be supported by
a stable social arrangement in which a player is deterred from deviating
by the threat that he will be “punished” if he does so. The same ar-
gument applies, with modifications, to a large class of finitely repeated
games. The need for modification is rooted in the fact that the out-
come in the last period of any Nash equilibrium of any finitely repeated
game must be a Nash equilibrium of the constituent game, a fact that
casts a shadow over the rest of the game. This shadow is longest in the
special case in which every player’s payoff in every Nash equilibrium of
the constituent game is equal to his minmax payoff (as in the Prisoner’s
Dilemma). In this case the intuitive argument behind the folk theorems
fails: the outcome in every period must be a Nash equilibrium of the
constituent game, since if there were a period in which the outcome were
not such an equilibrium then in the last such period some player could
deviate with impunity. The following result formalizes this argument.
Proposition 155.1 If the payoff profile in every Nash equilibrium of
the strategic game G is the profile (vi ) of minmax payoffs in G then
for any value of T the outcome (a1 , . . . , aT ) of every Nash equilibrium
of the T -period repeated game of G has the property that at is a Nash
equilibrium of G for all t = 1, . . . , T .
Proof. Let G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i and let a = (a1 , . . . , aT ) be the outcome
of a Nash equilibrium s of the T -period repeated game of G. Suppose
156                                                Chapter 8. Repeated Games



that at is not a Nash equilibrium of G for some period t. Let t ≥ 1 be
the last period for which at is not a Nash equilibrium of G; suppose that
ui (at−i , ai ) > ui (at ). Consider a strategy ŝi of player i that differs from
si only in that after the history (a1 , . . . , at−1 ) it chooses ai , and after
any longer history h it chooses an action that, given the profile s−i (h) of
actions planned by the other players after the history h, yields at least
i’s minmax payoff. The outcome of (s−i , ŝi ) is a terminal history â that
is identical to a through period t−1; ui (ât ) > ui (at ) and ui (âr ) ≥ ui (ar )
for r ≥ t + 1. Thus player i prefers â to a, contradicting our assumption
that s is a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game.                              2
   This result applies to a very small set of games. If, contrary to the
assumptions of the result, the constituent game has a Nash equilibrium
a∗ in which some player’s payoff exceeds his minmax payoff then that
player can be punished for deviating in the penultimate period of the
game whenever the outcome in the final period is a∗ . This punishment
may not be enough to deter the deviation if the difference between the
player’s minmax payoff and his payoff in a∗ is small. However, there is
always some integer L such that if the outcome is a∗ in the last L peri-
ods then any deviation by the player in any period before this sequence
of L plays begins is deterred by the threat to impose upon the player
his minmax payoff in the remaining periods. Further, the value of L is
independent of the length T of the game, so that if for each player the
constituent game has a Nash equilibrium in which that player’s payoff
exceeds his minmax payoff then for T large enough any feasible strictly
enforceable payoff profile can be approximately achieved as the average
payoff profile in a Nash equilibrium of the T -period repeated game. For
simplicity we state and prove this result only for the case in which the
constituent game has a single Nash equilibrium in which every player’s
payoff exceeds his minmax payoff; we also restrict attention to equilib-
rium paths that are repetitions of a single outcome of the constituent
game.
Proposition 156.1 (Nash folk theorem for finitely repeated games) If
G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i has a Nash equilibrium â in which the payoff of every
player i exceeds his minmax payoff vi then for any strictly enforceable
outcome a∗ of G and any  > 0 there exists an integer T ∗ such that
if T > T ∗ the T -period repeated game of G has a Nash equilibrium in
which the payoff of each player i is within  of ui (a∗ ).
Proof. Consider the strategy of player i that is carried out by the fol-
lowing machine. The set of states consists of Norm t for t = 1, . . . , T − L
 8.10 Finitely Repeated Games                                                   157



 (L is determined later), Nash, and P (j) for each j ∈ N . Each player i
 chooses a∗i in Norm t for all values of t, âi in Nash, and punishes player j
 by choosing (p−j )i in P (j). If a single player j deviates in the state
 Norm t then there is a transition to P (j); otherwise there is a transition
 to Norm t+1 if t < T − L and to Nash if t = T − L. Once reached, the
 states P (j) and Nash are never left. The outcome is that a∗ is chosen
 in the first T − L periods and â is chosen in the last L periods. To
 summarize, player i’s machine is the following.
    •   Set of states: {Norm t : 1 ≤ t ≤ T − L} ∪ {P (j): j ∈ N } ∪ {Nash}.
    •   Initial state: Norm 1 .
    •   Output function: In Norm t choose a∗i , in P (j) choose (p−j )i , and
        in Nash choose âi .
    •   Transition function:
         ◦   From Norm t move to Norm t+1 unless either t = T − L, in which
             case move to Nash, or exactly one player, say j, deviated from
             a∗ , in which case move to P (j).
         ◦   P (j) for any j ∈ N and Nash are absorbing.
    It remains to specify L. A profitable deviation is possible only in one
 of the states Norm t . To deter such a deviation we require L to be large
 enough that maxai ∈Ai ui (a∗−i , ai ) − ui (a∗ ) ≤ L(ui (â) − vi ) for all i ∈ N .
 Finally, in order to obtain a payoff profile within  of u(a∗ ) we choose
 T ∗ so that |[(T ∗ − L)ui (a∗ ) + Lui (â)]/T ∗ − ui (a∗ )| <  for all i ∈ N . 2
? Exercise 157.1    Extend this result to the case in which the Nash
 equilibrium of G in which player i’s payoff exceeds vi may depend on i.

 8.10.3      Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
 In any subgame perfect equilibrium of a finitely repeated game the out-
 come in the last period after any history (not just after the history that
 occurs if every player adheres to his strategy) is a Nash equilibrium of
 the constituent game. Thus the punishment embedded in the strategies
 used to prove the Nash folk theorem (Proposition 156.1) is not consistent
 with a subgame perfect equilibrium; indeed, no punishment is possible
 if the constituent game has a unique Nash equilibrium payoff profile.
 Consequently we have the following result.
 Proposition 157.2 If the strategic game G has a unique Nash equilib-
 rium payoff profile then for any value of T the action profile chosen after
158                                            Chapter 8. Repeated Games



                               C      D      E

                         C    3, 3    0, 4   0, 0

                         D    4, 0    1, 1   0, 0

                                             1 1
                         E    0, 0    0, 0   2, 2


                Figure 158.1 A modified Prisoner’s Dilemma.


any history in any subgame perfect equilibrium of the T -period repeated
game of G is a Nash equilibrium of G.
Proof. The outcome in any subgame that starts in period T of any sub-
game perfect equilibrium of the repeated game is a Nash equilibrium of
G. Thus each player’s payoff in the last period of the game is indepen-
dent of history. Consequently in any subgame that starts in period T −1
the action profile is a Nash equilibrium of G. An inductive argument
completes the proof.                                                  2
   If the constituent game has more than one Nash equilibrium payoff
profile then punishment can be embedded in a subgame perfect equi-
librium strategy profile: the players’ payoffs in the final periods of the
game can depend on their behavior in previous periods. The following
example illustrates the equilibria that can arise in this case. We argue
that in the T -period repeated game of the strategic game in Figure 158.1
there is a subgame perfect equilibrium for which the outcome is (C, C)
in every period but the last three, in which it is (D, D), so that if T is
large the average payoff profile is close to (3, 3). In the equilibrium each
player uses the following strategy: choose C in every period through
period T − 3 unless one of the players chose D in some previous period,
in which case choose E in every subsequent period, regardless of the
subsequent outcomes; if the outcome is (C, C) in every period through
T − 3 then choose D in the last three periods. A player who deviates to
D in any period up to T − 3 after a history in which the outcome was
(C, C) in every previous period gains one unit of payoff in that period,
but then subsequently loses at least 1.5 units, since the other player
chooses E in every subsequent period. That is, the threat to play E
subsequently is enough to deter any deviation; this punishment is cred-
ible since (E, E) is a Nash equilibrium of the constituent game. (Note
that the same strategy profile is a subgame perfect equilibrium also if
8.10 Finitely Repeated Games                                                159



in the constituent game the payoff profile ( 12 , 12 ) is replaced by (0, 0), in
which case the constituent game differs from the Prisoner’s Dilemma
only in that each player has an additional weakly dominated action.)
   This example makes it clear that if there are two Nash equilibria of the
constituent game G, one of which dominates the other, then any payoff
profile in which every player obtains more than his payoff in the inferior
Nash equilibrium of G can be achieved as the average payoff profile in a
subgame perfect equilibrium of the T -period repeated game of G for T
large enough. In fact a stronger result can be established: any strictly
enforceable payoff profile can be achieved as the average payoff profile
in a subgame perfect equilibrium of the repeated game. Such a payoff
profile is supported by a strategy profile that, up until the final periods
of the game, is akin to that constructed in the proof of the perfect folk
theorem for the discounting criterion (Proposition 151.1).
   In the following statement of the result we restrict attention to equi-
librium paths that consist of the repetition of a single outcome of the
constituent game (as we did in the discussion above).
Proposition 159.1 (Perfect folk theorem for finitely repeated games)
Let a∗ be a strictly enforceable outcome of G = hN, (Ai ), (ui )i. Assume
that (i) for each i ∈ N there are two Nash equilibria of G that differ in
the payoff of player i and (ii) there is a collection (a(i))i∈N of strictly
enforceable outcomes of G such that for every player i ∈ N we have
a∗ i a(i) and a(j) i a(i) for all j ∈ N \ {i}. Then for any  > 0 there
exists an integer T ∗ such that if T > T ∗ the T -period repeated game of
G has a subgame perfect equilibrium in which the payoff of each player i
is within  of ui (a∗ ).
   We omit a proof, which may be found in Krishna (1989), for exam-
ple. The basic argument (which draws upon the ideas in the proofs of
Propositions 151.1 and 156.1) is the following. Time is divided into three
stages. The second and third phases have fixed lengths; as T increases,
the length of the first phase increases. In the absence of a deviation,
in the first two phases the players adhere to a∗ and in the third phase
they play according to a sequence of Nash equilibria of G for which each
player’s average payoff exceeds his lowest Nash equilibrium payoff in G.
   Deviations are punished as follows. A deviation by player i that occurs
during the first phase is punished by the other players’ using actions that
hold the deviant to his minmax payoff for long enough to wipe out his
gain. After this punishment is complete, the players switch to a(i).
If player j deviates during the time he was supposed to participate in
160                                           Chapter 8. Repeated Games



the punishment of player i then the players switch to a(j), which is
worse for j than a(i). A deviation that occurs during the second phase,
when there is not enough time left to punish the deviator and deter
the punishers from deviating from the punishment, is deterred by each
player’s choosing his action in the Nash equilibrium of G that is worst
for the deviating player. The lengths of the second and third phases are
chosen to be large enough to deter deviations. The lower bounds on the
lengths of the second and third stages are independent of T , so that for
T large enough the average payoff profile induced by the strategy profile
is close to u(a∗ ).

Notes

Early discussions of the notion of a repeated game and the ideas behind
the Nash folk theorem (Section 8.5) appear in Luce and Raiffa (1957,
pp. 97–105 (especially p. 102) and Appendix 8), Shubik (1959b, Ch. 10
(especially p. 226)), and Friedman (1971). Perfect folk theorems for the
limit of means criterion were established by Aumann and Shapley and
by Rubinstein in the mid 1970’s; see Aumann and Shapley (1994) and
Rubinstein (1994). The perfect folk theorem for the overtaking criterion
(Proposition 149.1) is due to Rubinstein (1979). The perfect folk theo-
rem for the discounting criterion (Proposition 151.1) is due to Fudenberg
and Maskin (1986); the proof that we give is based on Abreu, Dutta, and
Smith (1994). Section 8.9 is based on Abreu (1988). Proposition 155.1
and the Nash and perfect folk theorems for finitely repeated games
(Propositions 156.1 and 159.1) are due to Benoı̂t and Krishna (1985,
1987). (Luce and Raiffa (1957, Section 5.5) earlier argued that the
conclusion of Proposition 155.1 holds for the Prisoner’s Dilemma.)
   For an early discussion of the difference between the models of finitely
and infinitely repeated games (Section 8.2) see Aumann (1959, Sec-
tion 6). For a detailed discussion of preference relations over streams
of outcomes see, for example, Diamond (1965). For a presentation of
some of the folk theorems in the language of machines see Ben-Porath
and Peleg (1987). The example in Figure 158.1 is taken from Benoı̂t
and Krishna (1985); Friedman (1985) contains a similar example. Ex-
ercise 148.1 is due to Fudenberg and Levine (1989). Exercise 152.1 is
taken from Fudenberg and Maskin (1986).
   For a discussion of the issues that arise when the players use mixed
strategies see Fudenberg and Maskin (1991). As we have seen, the equi-
libria of a repeated game are not all efficient; further, the outcome
Notes                                                                    161



generated by an equilibrium after a deviation occurs may not be ef-
ficient even if the outcome in the absence of any deviation is efficient.
Pearce (1992, Section 4) discusses models that examine the consequences
of allowing the set of players, after any history, to switch from their cur-
rent strategy profile to one that is Pareto superior (i.e. to “renegotiate”).
If some or all of the players in a repeated game do not know the form
of the constituent game then many new issues arise. Zamir (1992) and
Forges (1992) are surveys of work in this area.
   Krishna (1989), Sorin (1990, 1992), Fudenberg (1992), and Pearce
(1992) are surveys that cover the material in this chapter and extensions
of it.
9          Complexity Considerations in Repeated
           Games




In this chapter we investigate the structure of the equilibrium strategies
in an infinitely repeated game in which each player is concerned about
the complexity of his strategy.

9.1   Introduction

In the previous chapter we described representatives of a family of results
known as “folk theorems”, which establish, under a variety of assump-
tions about the players’ preferences, that a very wide range of payoffs is
compatible with Nash equilibrium and even subgame perfect equilibrium
in an infinitely repeated game. A folk theorem entails the construction
of some equilibria that generate the required outcomes. It does not de-
mand that these equilibrium strategies be reasonable in any sense; our
judgments about the nature of the equilibrium strategies used in the
proofs are all informal. In this chapter we focus more closely on the
structure of the equilibrium strategies rather than on the set of equi-
librium payoffs, using the tool of a machine described in the previous
chapter.
   The basic assumption upon which the analysis is predicated is that
players care about the complexity of their strategies. When choosing
a strategy a player is confronted with a tradeoff: on the one hand he
would like his strategy to serve his goals as well as possible, and on
the other hand he would like it to be as simple as possible. There are
many reasons why a player may value simplicity: a more complex plan
of action is more likely to break down; it is more difficult to learn; it
may require time to implement. We do not study these reasons here,
but simply assume that complexity is costly and is under the control of
the decision-maker.
164                 Chapter 9. Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games



   We explore the effect of this assumption on the equilibrium outcomes
of an infinitely repeated game, asking, in particular, how the introduc-
tion of a cost of complexity affects the predictions of the model. Al-
though we limit attention to repeated games, complexity considerations
may be studied in the context of any model of choice. A model that in-
cludes such “procedural” aspects of decision-making is known as a model
of “bounded rationality”.

9.2    Complexity and the Machine Game

In this chapter we restrict attention, for simplicity, to an infinitely re-
peated game in which the players’ preferences are represented by the
discounting criterion: we study the players’ behavior in the two-player
δ-discounted infinitely repeated game of G = h{1, 2}, (Ai ), (ui )i (see
Section 8.3). We study this behavior by analyzing a machine game,
in which each player chooses a machine to play the infinitely repeated
game. In this chapter we define a machine of player i to be a four-tuple
hQi , qi0 , fi , τi i in which
  •   Qi is a set of states
  •   qi0 ∈ Qi is the initial state
  •   fi : Qi → Ai is the output function
  •   τi : Qi × Aj → Qi (where j 6= i) is the transition function.
This definition differs from that given in the previous chapter (Sec-
tion 8.4) in that a player’s transition function describes how the state
changes in response to the action of the other player, not in response to
an outcome of the strategic game (i.e. a pair of actions). As defined in
the previous chapter, a machine corresponds to the notion of a strategy
in an extensive game, which requires that a player’s action be specified
for every history, including those that are precluded by the strategy it-
self (see Section 6.4). Here we want a machine to correspond to a plan
of action as it is usually understood, and thus take as an input to a
player’s transition function only the action of the other player.
   Every pair (M1 , M2 ) of machines induces a sequence (at (M1 , M2 ))∞
                                                                       t=1
of outcomes in G and a sequence (q t (M1 , M2 ))∞  t=1 of pairs  of states
defined as follows: for i = 1, 2 and t ≥ 1 we have
  •   qi1 (M1 , M2 ) = qi0
  •   ati (M1 , M2 ) = fi (qit (M1 , M2 ))
  •   qit+1 (M1 , M2 ) = τi (qit (M1 , M2 ), atj (M1 , M2 )) (where j 6= i).
  9.2 Complexity and the Machine Game                                         165



     We restrict each player to choose a machine that has a finite num-
  ber of states, and denote the set of all such machines for player i by
  Mi . Thus the machine game is a two-player strategic game in which
  the set of actions of each player i is Mi . To complete the descrip-
  tion of this game we need to describe the players’ preferences. If we
  assume that each player i cares only about his payoff Ui (M1 , M2 ) =
           P∞
  (1 − δ) t=1 δ t−1 ui (at (M1 , M2 )) in the repeated game then we obtain
  the same conclusion as that of the Nash folk theorem (Proposition 145.2),
  since the trigger strategies that are used in the proof of this result can be
  implemented by finite machines. If, on the other hand, each player cares
  about both his payoff in the repeated game and the complexity of his
  strategy then, as we shall see, we obtain results that are very different
  from the folk theorem.
     There are many ways of defining the complexity of a machine. We take
  a naı̈ve approach: the complexity c(M ) of the machine M = hQ, q 0 , f, τ i
  is its number of states (i.e. the cardinality of Q). Our analysis is sensi-
  tive to the measure of complexity that we use. We view this measure as
  an additional piece of information about the strategic situation, which
  should reflect the relevant difficulties of the player in carrying out a strat-
  egy. From this perspective the sensitivity of the model to the complexity
  measure is desirable: in different circumstances different measures may
  be appropriate.
     In the following definition we assume that each player’s preferences
  in a machine game are positively sensitive to his payoff in the repeated
  game and negatively sensitive to the complexity of his machine.
I Definition 165.1 A machine game of the δ-discounted infinitely
  repeated game of h{1, 2}, (Ai ), (ui )i is a strategic game h{1, 2}, (Mi ),
  (%i )i in which for each player i
    •   Mi is the set of all finite machines for player i in the infinitely
        repeated game
    •   %i is a preference ordering that is increasing in player i’s payoff in
        the repeated game and decreasing in the complexity of his machine:
        (M1 , M2 ) i (M10 , M20 ) whenever either Ui (M1 , M2 ) > Ui (M10 , M20 )
        and c(Mi ) = c(Mi0 ), or Ui (M1 , M2 ) = Ui (M10 , M20 ) and c(Mi ) <
        c(Mi0 ).
    A special case is that in which each player’s preferences are additive:
  %i is represented by Ui (M1 , M2 ) − γc(Mi ) for some γ > 0, in which
  case γ can be interpreted as the cost of each state of the machine. An-
  other special case is that in which the preferences are lexicographic:
 166              Chapter 9. Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games



                                       C   D

                               C   3, 3    0, 5

                               D   5, 0    1, 1

                    Figure 166.1 The Prisoner’s Dilemma.
                                            
                           C                 C or D
                       ?                 ?
                       C: C            - D: D
                                   D

 Figure 166.2 The machine M in Example 166.1 (a machine that carries out the
 grim strategy in the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma).


 each player is concerned first with his payoff in the repeated game and
 second with the complexity of his machine. This case is especially inter-
 esting since lexicographic preferences are close to the preferences in the
 standard model of a repeated game in which complexity considerations
 are absent, a model that is the progenitor of the model of a machine
 game.
 Example 166.1 Suppose that the game G is the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
  with the payoffs given in Figure 166.1. Consider the two-state machine
  M that implements the grim strategy (see Figure 166.2). If the players’
  common discount factor δ is large enough then this machine is a best
  response to itself in the δ-discounted repeated game of G. Even by using
  a more complex machine, player 1 cannot achieve a higher payoff in the
  repeated game. However, while there is no machine of player 1 that
  achieves a higher payoff in the repeated game than M does, given that
  player 2 uses M , there is a machine of player 1 that achieves the same
  payoff and is less complex: that in which there is one state, in which C
  is chosen. The state D in the machine M is designed to allow a player to
  threaten his opponent, but in equilibrium this threat is redundant since
  each player always chooses C. Thus either player can drop the state D
  without affecting the outcome; hence (M, M ) is not a Nash equilibrium
  of the machine game.
 Example 166.2 For the Prisoner’s Dilemma (as in the previous ex-
  ample) let M be the machine in Figure 167.1. The behavior that this
  machine generates can be interpreted as beginning with a display of the
9.2 Complexity and the Machine Game                                          167


                                                                 
                                                                  C
                    D -                D -               D - ?
         P1 : D            P2 : D             P3 : D         R: C
          6 C                  C                  C                 D

                Figure 167.1 The machine M in Example 166.2.


ability to punish. After this display the player begins a cooperative
phase in which he plays C, threatening to punish a deviant by moving
back to the initial state. If both players use the machine M then the se-
quence of payoffs in the repeated game is (1, 1, 1) followed by an infinite
sequence of 3’s.
    We claim that if the players’ common discount factor δ is large enough
then (M, M ) is a Nash equilibrium of the machine game if the players’
preferences do not give too much weight to complexity (as is the case if
their preferences are either lexicographic or additive with a small cost
of complexity). The argument is as follows. To increase his payoff in
the repeated game, a player must choose D at least sometimes when his
opponent’s machine is in state R. Any such choice of D causes the other
machine to choose D for at least three periods, so that when δ is close
enough to 1 a player does not gain by such a maneuver (5 + δ + δ 2 + δ 3 <
3 + 3δ + 3δ 2 + 3δ 3 for δ close enough to 1). Thus for δ large enough a
player cannot increase his payoff in the repeated game by any machine,
however complex.
    We now show that a player cannot achieve the same payoff in the re-
peated game by using a less complex machine. To achieve the same
payoff he must choose C at least once when the other player’s ma-
chine is in state R. To do so his machine must have at least four
states. To see this, consider the first period, say t, in which qjt = R
and fi (qit ) = C. We must have fi (qit−3 ) = fi (qit−2 ) = fi (qit−1 ) =
D and hence, in particular, qit 6= qit−1 . Further, qit−2 6= qit−1 since
τi (qit−2 , D) = qit−1 while τi (qit−1 , D) = qit . Similarly, qit−3 6= qit−2 and
qit−3 6= qit−1 .
  In a machine game a player has to solve a problem in which he balances
his desires to achieve a high payoff and to employ a simple machine. In
some sense this problem is more complicated than that of finding an
optimal strategy in the repeated game, since the player must consider
the complexity of his rule of behavior; we do not impose any constraint
on the player’s ability to solve this problem.
168                   Chapter 9. Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games



9.3        The Structure of the Equilibria of a Machine Game

We now characterize the structure of the Nash equilibria of a machine
game. We first generalize an observation we made about Example 166.1:
if the machine Mi of some player i has a state that is not used when M1
and M2 operate then (M1 , M2 ) is not a Nash equilibrium, since the state
can be eliminated without affecting the outcome, and player i prefers
the machine in which the state is eliminated.
Lemma 168.1 If (M1∗ , M2∗ ) is a Nash equilibrium of a machine game
then for every state qi of the machine Mi∗ there exists a period t such
that qit (M1∗ , M2∗ ) = qi .
  Our next result shows that in a Nash equilibrium each machine has
the same number of states and that any Nash equilibrium of a machine
game corresponds to a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game.
Lemma 168.2 If (M1∗ , M2∗ ) is a Nash equilibrium of a machine game
then
 •       c(M1∗ ) = c(M2∗ )
 •       the pair of strategies in the repeated game associated with (M1∗ , M2∗ )
         is a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game.
Proof. For any strategy sj of player j in the repeated game and any
machine Mi of player i, denote by Uj (Mi , sj ) player j’s payoff in the
repeated game when he uses sj and player i uses the strategy that cor-
responds to Mi . Since Mi∗ is finite, player j’s problem maxsj Uj (Mi∗ , sj )
of finding a best response (ignoring complexity) to the machine Mi∗ in
the repeated game has a solution (see Derman (1970, Theorem 1 on
p. 23)). Let Mi∗ = hQi , qi0 , fi , τi i and for each q ∈ Qi let Vj (q) =
maxsj Uj (Mi∗ (q), sj ), where Mi∗ (q) is the machine that differs from Mi∗
only in that the initial state is q. For each q ∈ Qi let Aj (q) be the set
of solutions to the problem

                         max {uj (fi (q), aj ) + δVj (τi (q, aj ))}.
                        aj ∈Aj

Then in the repeated game a strategy of player j is a best response to
the strategy corresponding to Mi∗ if and only if the action it plays when
player i’s machine is in state q is a member of Aj (q). In particular,
choosing a∗j (q) ∈ Aj (q) for each q ∈ Qi , there is a best response that is
implemented by the following machine, which has c(Mi∗ ) states.
     •    The set of states is Qi .
 9.3 The Structure of the Equilibria of a Machine Game                            169


                                                                       
                                                                        C
               D        D              D        C        C        D
   M1 : I1 : D - I2 : D - p p p Ik : D - Q1 : C - Q2 : C - Q3 : C - Q4 : D
                                            ?

         6 C         C              C       D        D        C         D
                                                                       
                                                                         D
                D        D p p p        D    ?   C        C        C
   M2 : I 1 : D - I2 : D -       Ik : D - Q1 : C - Q2 : C - Q3 : D - Q4 : C
         6 C          C              C       D        D         D       C



 Figure 169.1 Machines M1 for player 1 and M2 for player 2 for the infinitely
 repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma. The pair (M1 , M2 ) generates the path in which (D, D)
 occurs for k periods and then the sequence (C, C), (C, C), (C, D), (D, C) is repeated
 indefinitely.


    •   The initial state is qi0 .
    •   The output function fj is defined by fj (q) = a∗j (q).
    •   The transition function τj is defined by τj (q, x) = τi (q, fj (q)) for
        any x ∈ Ai .
 Since (M1∗ , M2∗ ) is a Nash equilibrium of the machine game it follows
 that c(Mj∗ ) ≤ c(Mi∗ ) and hence c(M1∗ ) = c(M2∗ ). Further, since player j
 can use a machine with c(Mi∗ ) states to achieve a payoff in the repeated
 game equal to maxsj Uj (Mi∗ , sj ) it follows that the pair of strategies that
 is executed by (M1∗ , M2∗ ) is a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game. 2
? Exercise 169.1    Give an example of a three-player game for which the
 associated machine game has a Nash equilibrium in which the numbers
 of states in the players’ machines are not the same.
   We now derive a result that has strong implications for the set of
 Nash equilibria of a machine game. To obtain some intuition for the
 result, consider the pair of machines for the infinitely repeated Prisoner’s
 Dilemma that is shown in Figure 169.1. This pair of machines generates
 a path in which there are initially k ≥ 2 periods in which the outcome is
 (D, D) (the players display their threats), after which a cycle of length
 four in which the outcomes are (C, C), (C, C), (C, D) and (D, C) is
 repeated indefinitely. Any deviation by a player from the prescribed
 behavior in the cycle causes his opponent’s machine to go to its initial
 state, punishing the deviant for k periods. As you can check, the pair of
 machines is a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game when the discount
 factor δ is close enough to 1. However, it is not an equilibrium of the
170              Chapter 9. Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games



machine game. To see this, consider M1 . In each of the three states Q1 ,
Q2 , and Q3 player 1 takes the same action; she uses the fact that there
are three states only to know when to choose the action D. However, she
could obtain this information by observing player 2’s action, as follows.
Suppose that she adopts the machine M10 in which the three states Q1 ,
Q2 , and Q3 are replaced by a single state Q in which she chooses C,
the state remains Q so long as player 2 chooses C, the state switches
to Q4 if player 2 chooses D, and the transition from the state Ik is to
Q if player 2 chooses D. Then (M10 , M2 ) generates the same sequence
of outcomes of the Prisoner’s Dilemma as does (M1 , M2 ); thus in the
machine game player 1 can profitably deviate to M10 since it has fewer
states than M1 .
  Note that M10 does not monitor player 2’s behavior when player 2’s
machine is in Q1 or Q2 : if player 2 chooses D in either of these states
then M10 does not return to the state I1 but moves to Q4 . If player 1
uses the machine M10 then player 2 can exploit this feature by choosing
C in state Q3 .
  The situation is similar to that in which a paratrooper has to jump af-
ter counting to 100 and another paratrooper has to jump after counting
to 101. If the second paratrooper counts then he can monitor the first
paratrooper, who is afraid of jumping. However, counting is costly in the
tense environment of the plane, and the second paratrooper can avoid
the burden of counting by simply watching his friend and jumping im-
mediately after her. However, if the second paratrooper does not count
then the first paratrooper can exploit this lack of monitoring and . . . not
jump.
  In general we can show that if a Nash equilibrium pair of machines
generates outcomes in which one of the players takes the same action in
two different periods then the other player also takes the same action
in these two periods (contrary to the behavior of the players in periods
k + 2 and k + 3 of the example that we just discussed).
Lemma 170.1 If (M1∗ , M2∗ ) is a Nash equilibrium of a machine game
then there is a one-to-one correspondence between the actions of player 1
and player 2 prescribed by M1∗ and M2∗ : if ati (M1∗ , M2∗ ) = asi (M1∗ , M2∗ )
for some t 6= s then atj (M1∗ , M2∗ ) = asj (M1∗ , M2∗ ).
Proof. Let Mi∗ = hQi , qi0 , fi , τi i and for each qi ∈ Qi define Aj (qi )
as in the proof of Lemma 168.2. By the second part of Lemma 168.2
the machine Mj∗ executes a strategy in the repeated game that is a
solution of the problem maxsj Uj (Mi∗ , sj ). Therefore fj (qit (M1∗ , M2∗ )) ∈
9.3 The Structure of the Equilibria of a Machine Game                              171



Aj (qit (M1∗ , M2∗ )) for all t. Thus if there are two periods t and s in
which ati (M1∗ , M2∗ ) 6= asi (M1∗ , M2∗ ) and atj (M1∗ , M2∗ ) = asj (M1∗ , M2∗ ) then
there exists an optimal policy a0j of player j for which a0j (qit (M1∗ , M2∗ )) =
a0j (qis (M1∗ , M2∗ )). That is, player j uses the same action whenever player
i’s state is either qit (M1∗ , M2∗ ) or qis (M1∗ , M2∗ ). The following machine
carries out the policy a0j and has c(Mi∗ ) − 1 states, contradicting the
first part of Lemma 168.2.
   •   The set of states is Qi \ {qis }.
   •   The initial state is qi0 if qis 6= qi0 and is qit otherwise.
   •   The output function is defined by fj (q) = a0j (q).
   •   The transition function is defined as follows. If τi (q, fj (q)) = qis
       then τj (q, x) = qit for all x ∈ Ai ; otherwise τj (q, x) = τi (q, fj (q)) for
       all x ∈ Ai if q 6= qit and
                                   τi (qis , fj (qis )) if ai = asi (M1∗ , M2∗ )
                                 
                      t
                 τj (qi , ai ) =
                                   τi (qit , fj (qit )) otherwise
This completes the proof.                                                           2
   This result has a striking implication for the equilibrium outcome
path in any game in which each player has two actions. For example, if
in the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma two outcomes appear on the equi-
librium path, then this pair of outcomes is either {(C, C), (D, D)} or
{(C, D), (D, C)}.
   We now turn to an exploration of the structure of the equilibrium
machines. Since each player’s machine is finite there is a minimal number
                                                 0
t0 such that for some t > t0 we have qit = qit for both i = 1 and i = 2;
let t∗ be the minimal such t. The sequence of pairs of states starting in
period t0 consists of cycles of length t∗ − t0 . We refer to this stage as the
cycling phase; the stage before period t0 is the introductory phase.
   We now show that the sets of states that a player uses in the cycling
and introductory phases are disjoint. Further, in the introductory phase
each state is entered only once and each of a player’s states that is used
in the cycling phase appears only once in each cycle. Thus in equilibrium
there is a one-to-one correspondence between the states in the machines
of players 1 and 2, a fact that may be interpreted to mean that in each
period each machine “knows” the state that the other machine is in.
Proposition 171.1 If (M1∗ , M2∗ ) is an equilibrium of a machine game
then there exists a period t∗ and an integer ` < t∗ such that for
                                                         ∗
                                                           −1
i = 1, 2, the states in the sequence (qit (M1∗ , M2∗ ))tt=1   are distinct and
172                 Chapter 9. Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games



qit (M1∗ , M2∗ ) = qit−` (M1∗ , M2∗ ) for t ≥ t∗ .
    Proof. Let t∗ be the first period in which one of the states of either
of the two machines appears for the second time. That is, let t∗ be the
minimal time for which there is a player i and a period ti < t∗ such that
   ∗                    ∗                                         ∗
qit = qiti . We have ati = atii and hence, by Lemma 170.1, atj = atji .
                                           ∗
It follows that for all k ≥ 0 we have qit +k = qiti +k , and thus, using
Lemma 168.1, c(Mi∗ ) = t∗ − 1. By the selection of player i all states of
Mj∗ through time t∗ −1 are distinct, so that the first part of Lemma 168.2
                                              t      ∗
implies that there exists tj < t∗ such that qjj = qjt . It remains to show
that tj = ti . Assume to the contrary that, say, tj > ti . Then player j
can obtain the same path of outcomes with a machine in which qjti is
                                                      ∗
excluded by making a transition from qjti −1 to qjt , omitting qjti . But
this contradicts the optimality of Mj∗ .                                 2
   A machine game is a strategic game, so that no considerations of
the type modeled by the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium enter
the analysis. To incorporate such considerations, we can modify the
solution concept and require that after every history in the repeated
game the pair of machines be an equilibrium of the machine game. Such
a modification implies that the play of the machines does not have any
introductory phase: a player who can change his machine in the course
of play wants to omit any introductory states once the cycling phase is
reached. It follows that the set of equilibrium paths is severely restricted
by this modification of the solution, as Exercise 173.2 illustrates.

9.4    The Case of Lexicographic Preferences

The results of the previous section significantly limit the set of equilibria
of a machine game. To limit the set of equilibria further we need to
specify the tradeoff in each player’s preferences between his payoff in
the repeated game and the complexity of his machine. In this section
we assume that the players’ preferences are lexicographic (complexity
being a secondary consideration, after the payoff in the repeated game);
we restrict attention to the case in which the component game is the
Prisoner’s Dilemma (with payoffs as in Figure 166.1).
   As we noted above, Lemma 170.1 implies that the set of outcomes
that occurs on an equilibrium path is either a subset of {(C, C), (D, D)}
or a subset of {(C, D), (D, C)}. First consider equilibria of the former
type. Let nC and nD be two nonnegative integers, at least one of which
is positive. Then for δ close enough to 1 it can be shown that there is
 9.4 The Case of Lexicographic Preferences                                   173


                                                                      
                                                                      C
                  D-            D-             D-    ?       D-
         I1 : D        I2 : D         I3 : D      R1 : D           R2 : C
          6 C             C              C             C              D

 Figure 173.1 A machine M for either player in the infinitely repeated Prisoner’s
 Dilemma.


 an equilibrium with a cycle of length nC + nD in which (C, C) appears
 nC times and (D, D) appears nD times. For the case nC = nD = 1
 there is a symmetric equilibrium in which each player uses the machine
 M in Figure 173.1. (For preferences that are not lexicographic the pair
 (M, M ) is an equilibrium only if the players’s preferences do not put too
 much weight on complexity.)
? Exercise 173.1

  a. Show that if δ is close enough to 1 then the pair of machines (M, M )
     is a Nash equilibrium of the machine game.
  b. Show that if the machine M is modified so that in R1 it plays C, in
     R2 it plays D, and the transitions in R1 and R2 are reversed, then
     the new pair of machines is not a Nash equilibrium of the machine
     game.
 In these equilibria the introductory phase is nonempty, and this is so for
 any equilibrium that supports a path in which (C, C) is an outcome.
? Exercise 173.2  Show that every equilibrium in which (C, C) is one of
 the outcomes has an introductory phase.
    Now consider equilibria in which every outcome on the equilibrium
 path is either (C, D) or (D, C). Some such equilibria are cyclical, with-
 out any introductory phase. Precisely, for all positive integers n1 and
 n2 satisfying 5ni /(n1 + n2 ) > 1 for i = 1 and i = 2 there exists δ large
 enough that there is an equilibrium of the machine game in which the
 cycle consists of n1 plays of (D, C) followed by n2 plays of (C, D), with-
 out any introductory phase. (The condition on n1 and n2 ensures that
 each player’s average payoff exceeds his minmax payoff of 1.)
    An equilibrium for the case n1 = n2 = 1 is shown in Figure 174.1.
 One interpretation of this equilibrium is that the players alternate being
 generous towards each other. One can think of (C, D) as the event in
 which player 1 gives a gift to player 2 and (D, C) as the event in which
 player 2 gives a gift to player 1. In the equilibrium a player does not care
 if his opponent does not accept the gift (i.e. chooses C when he could
 174                Chapter 9. Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games


                                                       
                                                     C or D
                                  ?           C -
                           M1 : D: D              C: C
                                6 D
                                                       
                                                        C
                                  ?       C or D-
                           M2 : C: C                  D: D
                                                      6 D

 Figure 174.1 Machines M1 for player 1 and M2 for player 2 for the infinitely
 repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma. For δ large enough the pair (M1 , M2 ) is an equilibrium
 of the machine game; it generates the path consisting of repetitions of the cycle
 ((D, C), (C, D)) .


                                        A      B

                                  A    3, 1    1, 3

                                  B    2, 0    2, 0

   Figure 174.2 The constituent game for the repeated game in Exercise 174.1.


 have chosen D and received the gift), but he insists that his opponent
 give him a gift (play C) in periods in which he expects to get a gift: if
 he does not receive a gift then he does not move to the state in which
 he is generous.
    In our analysis so far the constituent game is a strategic game. One
 can think also of the case in which the constituent game is an extensive
 game. While the analysis of the Nash equilibria of the repeated game is
 unchanged (though the set of subgame perfect equilibria may be some-
 what different), the analysis of the Nash equilibria of the machine game
 is quite different in this case, as the following exercise demonstrates.
? Exercise 174.1   Consider the infinitely repeated game for which the
 constituent game is given in Figure 174.2.
  a. Show that the set of paths associated with the Nash equilibria of the
     machine game contains only the outcomes (A, A) and (B, B).
  b. Show that if the players’ preferences in the machine game are lexi-
     cographic, then every finite sequence containing only the outcomes
     (A, A) and (B, B) is the cycling phase of the path associated with
Notes                                                                   175



   some Nash equilibrium of the machine game for δ large enough.
 c. Notice that the game is the strategic form of an extensive game with
    perfect information. Assume that the players engage in the infinitely
    repeated game in which the constituent game is this extensive game,
    learning at the end of each round the terminal history that occurs.
    Show that the machine game for this repeated game has a unique
    Nash equilibrium, in which the payoff profile is (2, 0) in every period.
    [Hint: When player 1 chooses B she cannot monitor whether player 2
    plans to choose A or B if she chooses A.]

Notes

This chapter is based on Rubinstein (1986) and Abreu and Rubin-
stein (1988). The line of argument, and in particular the proof of
Lemma 170.1, is a modification due to Piccione (1992) of the proof of
Abreu and Rubinstein (1988). Exercise 174.1 is based on Piccione and
Rubinstein (1993).
   In a related strand of literature the complexity of the machines that
a player can employ is taken to be exogenously bounded. The main
aim of this line of research is to show that equilibrium outcomes that
differ from repetitions of (D, D) can be supported in the finitely repeated
Prisoner’s Dilemma; see for example Neyman (1985) and Zemel (1989).
10         Implementation Theory




In this chapter we study the inverse of the problem considered in the
previous chapters: rather than fix a game and look for the set of out-
comes given by some solution concept, we fix a set of outcomes and look
for a game that yields that set of outcomes as equilibria.

10.1   Introduction

The standard procedure in game theory is to formulate a model that
captures a situation and to investigate the set of outcomes that are
consistent with some solution concept. If we fix the structure of the
game and vary the players’ preferences then a solution concept induces
a correspondence from preference profiles to the set of outcomes.
   Our general approach in this book is that a game is not necessarily a
description of some physical rules that exist: most strategic situations
lack a clear structure, and even when one exists the players’ perceptions
of the situation do not necessarily coincide with an “objective” descrip-
tion of that situation. By contrast, in this chapter a planner is assumed
to set the rules of the interaction, and the individuals, when confronted
with these rules, are assumed to take them literally. The planner can
design the structure of the game but cannot control the players’ prefer-
ences or actions. She starts with a description of the outcomes she wishes
to associate with each possible preference profile and looks for a game
that “implements” this correspondence. On finding such a game she can
realize her objective by having the individuals play the game, assuming
of course that their behavior conforms with the solution concept.
   An assumption underlying this interpretation of an implementation
problem is that the planner can force the individuals to play the game
but cannot enforce the desirable outcome directly, possibly because she
178                                    Chapter 10. Implementation Theory



lacks information about some parameters of the situation, information
that is known to all participants but is either too costly or impossible
for her to obtain.
   To illustrate the nature of an implementation problem, consider a
planner who wishes to assign an object to one of two individuals. Sup-
pose that she wants to give it to the individual who values it most, but
does not know who this is. Her problem then is to design a game form
with the property that, for every possible pair of valuations, the out-
come according to some solution concept is that the object is given to
the individual who values it most. Whether this is possible depends on
the outcomes that the planner can impose on the individuals. For exam-
ple, she may be allowed only to transfer money from one individual to
another, or she may be allowed also to impose fines on the individuals.
   As in other chapters, we focus on the conceptual aspects of the theory
and present only a sample of the main ideas. We restrict attention to im-
plementation problems in which the individuals are fully informed about
the parameters of the situation; we do not touch upon the large literature
that considers the case in which there is asymmetric information.

10.2   The Implementation Problem

Let N be a set of individuals, C a set of feasible outcomes, and P a set of
preference profiles over C. We denote individual i’s preference relation
by %i and sometimes denote a preference profile (%i )i∈N simply by %.
A choice rule is a function that assigns a subset of C to each profile
in P. We refer to a choice rule that is singleton-valued as a choice
function. The objective of the planner is to design a game form whose
outcomes, for each preference profile % in P, coincide with f (%), where
f is the choice rule or the choice function. If f is not singleton-valued
then the planner is concerned that each of the outcomes in f (%) be pos-
sible. For instance, in the example discussed in the previous section the
planner may wish to assign the object to the individual whose valuation
is highest, without discriminating between the individuals if their valu-
ations are the same. In a more general problem, the planner may wish
to implement the choice rule that associates with each preference profile
the set of efficient outcomes.
   The planner controls the rules of the game, formalized as a game
form. A strategic game form with consequences in C is a triple
hN, (Ai ), gi where Ai , for each i ∈ N , is the set of actions available to
player i, and g: A → C (where A = ×i∈N Ai ) is an outcome function that
  10.2 The Implementation Problem                                       179



  associates an outcome with every action profile. A strategic game form
  and a preference profile (%i ) induce a strategic game hN, (Ai ), (%0i )i
  where %0i is defined by a %0i b if and only if g(a) %i g(b) for each
  i ∈ N . An extensive game form (with perfect information) with
  consequences in C is a tuple hN, H, P, gi where H is a set of histories,
  P : H \ Z → N is a player function, and g: Z → C is an outcome function
  (Z ⊆ H being the set of terminal histories). (Cf. Definition 89.1 and
  the following definition of an extensive game form.) An extensive game
  form and a preference profile induce an extensive game.
     The planner operates in an environment that consists of
     •   a finite set N of players, with |N | ≥ 2
     •   a set C of outcomes
     •   a set P of preference profiles over C
     •   a set G of (either strategic or extensive) game forms with conse-
         quences in C.
  When designing a game form to implement her objectives the planner
  must take into account how the individuals will play any possible game.
  A solution concept for the environment hN, C, P, Gi is a set-valued
  function S with domain G × P. If the members of G are strategic game
  forms then S takes values in the set of action profiles, while if the mem-
  bers of G are extensive game forms then S takes values in the set of
  terminal histories.
    The following definition is one formulation of the planner’s problem.
I Definition 179.1 Let hN, C, P, Gi be an environment and let S be a
  solution concept. The game form G ∈ G with outcome function g is said
  to S-implement the choice rule f : P → C if for every preference profile
  % ∈ P we have g(S(G, %)) = f (%). In this case we say the choice rule
  f is S-implementable in hN, C, P, Gi.
    In other notions of implementation via a strategic game form the set
  of actions of each player is required to be the set of possible prefer-
  ence profiles (each player must announce a preference relation for every
  player) and announcing the true profile is required to be consistent with
  the solution concept. One such notion is the following.
I Definition 179.2 Let hN, C, P, Gi be an environment in which G is a
  set of strategic game forms for which the set of actions of each player i
  is a set P of preference profiles, and let S be a solution concept. The
  strategic game form G = hN, (Ai ), gi ∈ G truthfully S-implements
  the choice rule f : P → C if for every preference profile % ∈ P we have
180                                     Chapter 10. Implementation Theory


 •    a∗ ∈ S(G, %) where a∗i = % for each i ∈ N (every player reporting
      the true preference profile is a solution of the game)
 •    g(a∗ ) ∈ f (%) (the outcome if every player reports the true preference
      profile is a member of f (%)).
In this case we say the choice rule f is truthfully S-implementable
in hN, C, P, Gi.
   This notion of implementation differs from the previously defined no-
tion in three respects. First, and most important, it requires the set
of actions of each player to be the set of preference profiles and “truth
telling” to be a solution to every game that may arise. Second, it al-
lows (non truth-telling) solutions of the game to yield outcomes that are
inconsistent with the choice rule. Third, it allows there to be prefer-
ence profiles for which not every outcome prescribed by the choice rule
corresponds to a solution of the game.
   Our discussion is organized according to the set of game forms under
consideration and the solution concept used. We begin with strategic
game forms and the solution of dominant strategy equilibrium; we then
consider strategic game forms and the solution of Nash equilibrium;
finally we consider extensive game forms and the solution of subgame
perfect equilibrium.
   We establish two types of results, one negative and one positive. The
negative results give conditions under which only degenerate choice rules
can be implemented. The positive ones give conditions under which ev-
ery rule in a very large set can be (at least approximately) implemented.
Results of the latter type are reminiscent of the “folk theorems” of Chap-
ter 8. Like the folk theorems their main interest is not the fact that
“anything is possible”; rather, the structures of the mechanisms that
we use to prove the results are the most interesting aspects of the in-
vestigation. Some features of these structures sometimes correspond to
mechanisms that we observe, giving us insight into the rationale for these
mechanisms.

10.3      Implementation in Dominant Strategies

In this section we assume that the planner is restricted to use a strategic
game form. We assume also that, desiring to avoid strategic complica-
tions, she aims to achieve her goals by designing the game so that the
outcomes that she wishes to implement are consistent with the solution
concept of dominant strategy equilibrium (DSE), defined as follows.
  10.3 Implementation in Dominant Strategies                               181



I Definition 181.1 A dominant strategy equilibrium of a strategic
  game hN, (Ai ), (%i )i is a profile a∗ ∈ A of actions with the property that
  for every player i ∈ N we have (a−i , a∗i ) %i (a−i , ai ) for all a ∈ A.
  Thus the action of every player in a dominant strategy equilibrium is
  a best response to every collection of actions for the other players, not
  just the equilibrium actions of the other players as in a Nash equilibrium
  (Definition 14.1). (Note that the fact that a∗ is a dominant strategy
  equilibrium does not imply that for any player i the action a∗i dominates
  (even weakly) all the other actions of player i: it could be that for some
  ai 6= a∗i we have (a−i , a∗i ) ∼i (a−i , ai ) for all a−i ∈ A−i .) The notion
  of DSE-implementation is strong, since a dominant strategy is optimal
  no matter what the other players do. We now see that it is hard to
  DSE-implement a choice rule.
     We say that a choice rule f : P → C is dictatorial if there is a
  player j ∈ N such that for any preference profile % ∈ P and outcome
  a ∈ f (%) we have a %j b for all b ∈ C. The following result, known as
  the Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem, is a milestone in implementation
  theory.
  Proposition 181.2 Let hN, C, P, Gi be an environment in which C
  contains at least three members, P is the set of all possible preference
  profiles, and G is the set of strategic game forms. Let f : P → C be a
  choice rule that is DSE-implementable and satisfies the condition
     for every a ∈ C there exists % ∈ P such that f (%) = {a}.         (181.3)
  Then f is dictatorial.
     A proof of this result uses the following result.
  Lemma 181.4 (Revelation principle for DSE-implementation) Let hN,
  C, P, Gi be an environment in which G is the set of strategic game forms.
  If a choice rule f : P → C is DSE-implementable then
   a. f is truthfully DSE-implementable
   b. there is a strategic game form G∗ = hN, (Ai ), g ∗ i ∈ G in which Ai is
      the set of all preference relations (rather than profiles) such that for
      all % ∈ P the action profile % is a dominant strategy equilibrium of
      the strategic game hG∗ , %i and g ∗ (%) ∈ f (%).
  Proof. Let G = hN, (Ai ), gi be a game form that DSE-implements f . We
  first prove (b). The set of dominant actions for any player j depends only
  on %j , so that we can define aj (%j ) to be a dominant action for player j
  in any game hG, (%−j , %j )i. Define the outcome function g ∗ of G∗ by
 182                                       Chapter 10. Implementation Theory



 g ∗ (%) = g((ai (%i ))). Since G DSE-implements f we have g ∗ (%) ∈ f (%).
 Now suppose that there is a preference profile % for which %j is not
 a dominant strategy for player j in G∗ . Then there is a preference
 profile %0 such that g ∗ (%0−j , %0j ) j g ∗ (%0−j , %j ), so that aj (%j ) is not
 a best response in hG, %i to the collection of actions (ai (%0i ))i∈N \{j} , a
 contradiction. Thus % is a dominant strategy equilibrium of hG∗ , %i.
     It is immediate that % is a dominant strategy for every player in
 the game hG0 , %i in which the set of actions of each player is P and
 the outcome function is given by g 0 ((%(i))) = g ∗ ((%i (i))) (where %(i)
 is a preference profile for each i ∈ N ), so that f is truthfully DSE-
 implementable, proving (a).                                                      2
    From this lemma it follows that if a choice rule cannot be truthfully
 DSE-implemented then it cannot be DSE-implemented. Thus for exam-
 ple if P contains only strict preference relations then the choice function
 that chooses the second ranked outcome in player 1’s preferences is not
 DSE-implementable: if it were, then by the lemma a dominant strategy
 in G∗ for player 1 would be to announce her true preference relation,
 but in fact in G∗ it is better for her to announce a preference relation
 in which her most preferred action is ranked second.
    Notice that the game G∗ in the lemma does not necessarily DSE-
 implement the choice rule since, as we noted earlier, the notion of truth-
 ful DSE-implementation does not exclude the possibility that there are
 non-truthful dominant strategy profiles for which the outcome is dif-
 ferent from any given by the choice rule. In brief, it does not follow
 from Lemma 181.4 that DSE-implementation is equivalent to truthful
 DSE-implementation.
? Exercise 182.1     Show that if the set P of preference profiles con-
 tains only strict preferences then a choice function is truthfully DSE-
 implementable if and only if it is DSE-implementable.
    The main part of the proof of the Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem
 (181.2) is the proof of the following result in social choice theory, which
 we omit. (The standard proof of this result relies on Arrow’s impossi-
 bility theorem (for a proof of which see, for example, Sen (1986)).)
 Lemma 182.2 Let C be a set that contains at least three members and
 let P be the set of all possible preference profiles. If a choice function
 f : P → C satisfies (181.3) and for every preference profile % ∈ P we
 have f (%−j , %j ) %j f (%−j , %0j ) for every preference relation %0j then f
 is dictatorial.
 10.3 Implementation in Dominant Strategies                                 183



 Proof of Proposition 181.2. It follows from the proof of Lemma 181.4
 that if the choice rule f is DSE-implementable, say by the game form
 G, then any selection g ∗ of f (i.e. g ∗ (%) ∈ f (%) for all % ∈ P) has
 the property that for every preference profile % we have g ∗ (%−j , %j ) %j
 g ∗ (%−j , %0j ) for every preference relation %0j . Since f satisfies (181.3),
 g ∗ does also. Consequently by Lemma 182.2 g ∗ is dictatorial, so that f
 is also.                                                                     2
? Exercise 183.1    Explain, without making reference to the Gibbard–
 Satterthwaite theorem (181.2), why the following choice function is not
 DSE-implementable in an environment hN, C, P, Gi in which C contains
 at least three members, P is the set of all possible preference profiles,
 and G is the set of strategic game forms:
                
                  a if for all i ∈ N we have a i b for all b 6= a
        f (%) =
                  a∗ otherwise,
 where a∗ is an arbitrary member of C.
     The Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem (181.2) applies to an environ-
 ment hN, C, P, Gi in which P is the set of all possible preference profiles.
 There are environments in which P does not contain all possible prefer-
 ence profiles for which we can construct game forms that DSE-implement
 nondegenerate choice rules. The most well-known such game forms are
 those studied by Clarke (1971) and Groves (1973), which are designed
 for a situation in which a set of individuals has to decide whether or not
 to pursue some costly joint project and, if they decide to go ahead, how
 to assign the expenses. Clarke and Groves take the set C of outcomes
 to consist of all pairs (x, (mi )) where x = 1 or 0 according to whether
 or not the project is undertaken and mi is a payment by individual i.
 They impose the condition that the preference relation over C of each
 player i be represented by a utility function of the form θi x−mi for some
 θi ∈ R; under this assumption we can identify the set P of preference
 profiles with the set RN of profiles of real numbers. The aim of the game
 forms that Clarke and Groves construct is to implement choice functions
 f : RN → C with the property that the project is undertaken if and only
    P
 if i∈N θi ≥ γ, where γ ≥ 0 is the cost of the project.
     Not all such choice functions are DSE-implementable. The next propo-
 sition and exercise establish that such a choice function f is truthfully
 DSE-implementable if and only if for each j ∈ N there is a function hj
 such that mj (θ) = x(θ)(γ − i∈N \{j} θi )+hj (θ−j ) for all θ ∈ RN , where
                               P

 f (θ) = (x(θ), m(θ)). In the strategic game form used to implement f ,
184                                             Chapter 10. Implementation Theory



each player j announces a number aj , interpreted as a declaration of
his value of the project, and the project is executed if and only if the
sum of these declarations is at least γ; the payment made by player j
is equal to hj (a−j ) (which is independent of his announcement), plus,
if the project is carried out, an amount equal to the difference between
the cost of the project and the sum of the announcements made by the
other players. Formally, in this strategic game form hN, (Ai ), gi we have
Ai = R and g(a) = (x(a), m(a)) for each a ∈ A where
                              P
     x(a) = 1 if and only if    i∈N ai ≥ γ
   
                         P                                         (184.1)
     mj (a) = x(a)(γ − i∈N \{j} ai ) + hj (a−j ) for each j ∈ N.

Such a game form is called a Groves mechanism.
Proposition 184.2 Let hN, C, P, Gi be an environment in which C =
{(x, m): x ∈ {0, 1} and m ∈ RN }, P is the set of profiles (%i ) in which
each %i is represented by a utility function of the form θi x − mi for
some θi ∈ R, and G is the set of strategic game forms; identify P with
RN . A choice function f : RN → C with f (θ) = (x(θ), m(θ)) for which
                            P
                             i∈N θi ≥ γ
  • x(θ) = 1 if and only if


 •       for each j ∈ N there is a function hj such that mj (θ) = x(θ)(γ −
                                                    N
         P
            i∈N \{j} θi ) + hj (θ−j ) for all θ ∈ R
is truthfully DSE-implemented by the Groves mechanism hN, (Ai ), gi
defined in (184.1).
Proof. Let j ∈ N and let a−j be an arbitrary vector of actions of the
players other than j. We argue that when the players other than j
choose a−j , j’s payoff when he chooses aj = θj is at least as high as his
payoff when he chooses any other action in Aj . There are three cases.
     •    If x(a−j , θj ) = x(a−j , a0j ) then mj (a−j , a0j ) = mj (a−j , θj ) and hence
          g(a−j , a0j ) = g(a−j , θj ).
     •    If x(a−j , θj ) = 0 and x(a−j , a0j ) = 1 then j’s payoff under (a−j , θj )
          is −mj (a−j , θj ) = −hj (a−j ), while his payoff under (a−j , a0j ) is
          θj − mj (a−j , a0j ) = θj − (γ − i∈N \{j} ai ) − hj (a−j ) < −hj (a−j ),
                                            P
                                                 P
          since x(a−j , θj ) = 0 implies that i∈N \{j} ai + θj < γ.
     •    If x(a−j , θj ) = 1 and x(a−j , a0j ) = 0 then j’s payoff under (a−j , θj )
                                                   P
          is θj − mj (a−j , θj ) = θj − (γ − i∈N \{j} ai ) − hj (a−j ), while
          his payoff under (a−j , a0j ) is −mj (a−j , a0j ) = −hj (a−j ) ≤ θj −
                P
          (γ − i∈N \{j} ai ) − hj (a−j ), since x(a−j , θj ) = 1 implies that
          P
             i∈N \{j} ai + θj ≥ γ.
 10.4 Nash Implementation                                                    185



   Hence a dominant action for each player j is to choose aj = θj .
 The outcome g(θ) is equal to f (θ), so that hN, (Ai ), gi truthfully DSE-
 implements f .                                                         2
   Note that the Groves mechanism (184.1) does not Nash-implement a
 choice function f satisfying the conditions of the proposition: for exam-
 ple, if γ = 2, |N | = 2, and θi = 1 for both players then the associated
 game has, in addition to (1, 1), inefficient equilibria (e.g. (0, 0)).
? Exercise 185.1      In an environment like that in the previous proposition,
 show that if a choice function f with f (θ) = (x(θ), m(θ)) and x(θ) = 1 if
               P
 and only if i∈N θi ≥ γ is truthfully DSE-implementable then for each
                                                                  P
 j ∈ N there is a function hj such that mj (θ) = x(θ)(γ − i∈N \{j} θi ) −
 hj (θ−j ) for all θ ∈ RN . [You need to show that whenever x(θ−j , θj ) = 1
 and x(θ−j , θj0 ) = 0 then mj (θ−j , θj ) − mj (θ−j , θj0 ) = γ − i∈N \{j} θi .]
                                                                  P


 10.4    Nash Implementation

 We now turn to the case in which the planner, as in the previous section,
 uses strategic game forms, but assumes that for any game form she
 designs and for any preference profile the outcome of the game may be
 any of its Nash equilibria.
    The first result is a version of the revelation principle (see also Lemma
 181.4). It shows that any Nash-implementable choice rule is also truth-
 fully Nash-implementable: there is a game form in which (i ) each player
 has to announce a preference profile and (ii ) for any preference pro-
 file truth-telling is a Nash equilibrium. This result serves two pur-
 poses. First, it helps to determine the boundaries of the set of Nash-
 implementable choice rules. Second, it shows that a simple game can be
 used to achieve the objective of a planner who considers truthful Nash
 equilibrium to be natural and is not concerned about the outcome so
 long as it is in the set given by the choice rule.
 Lemma 185.2 (Revelation principle for Nash implementation) Let hN,
 C, P, Gi be an environment in which G is the set of strategic game
 forms. If a choice rule is Nash-implementable then it is truthfully Nash-
 implementable.
 Proof. Let G = hN, (Ai ), gi be a game form that Nash-implements the
 choice rule f : P → C and for each % ∈ P let (ai (%)) be a Nash equilib-
 rium of the game hG, %i. Define a new game form G∗ = hN, (A∗i ), g ∗ i
 in which A∗i = P for each i ∈ N and g ∗ (p) = g((ai (pi ))) for each
  186                                     Chapter 10. Implementation Theory



  p ∈ ×i∈N A∗i . (Note that each pi is a preference profile and p is a profile
  of preference profiles.) Clearly the profile p∗ in which p∗i = % for each
  i ∈ N is a Nash equilibrium of hG∗ , %i and g ∗ (p∗ ) ∈ f (%).            2
     Note that it does not follow from this result that in an analysis of
  Nash implementation we can restrict attention to games in which each
  player announces a preference profile, since the game that truthfully
  Nash-implements the choice rule may have non-truthful Nash equilibria
  that generate outcomes different from that dictated by the choice rule.
  Note also that it is essential that the set of actions of each player be
  the set of preference profiles, not the (smaller) set of preference rela-
  tions, as in part (b) of the revelation principle for DSE-implementation
  (Lemma 181.4).
     We now define a key condition in the analysis of Nash implementation.
I Definition 186.1 A choice rule f : P → C is monotonic if whenever
                  / f (%0 ) there is some player i ∈ N and some outcome
  c ∈ f (%) and c ∈
  b ∈ C such that c %i b and b 0i c.
  That is, in order for an outcome c to be selected by a monotonic choice
  rule when the preference profile is % but not when it is %0 the ranking of
  c relative to some other alternative must be worse under %0 than under
  % for at least one individual.
     An example of a monotonic choice rule f is that in which f (%) is the
  set of weakly Pareto efficient outcomes: f (%) = {c ∈ C: there is no b ∈
  C such that b i c for all i ∈ N }. Another example is the rule f in
  which f (%) consists of every outcome that is a favorite of at least one
  player: f (%) = {c ∈ C: there exists i ∈ N such that c %i b for all
  b ∈ C}.
  Proposition 186.2 Let hN, C, P, Gi be an environment in which G is
  the set of strategic game forms. If a choice rule is Nash-implementable
  then it is monotonic.
  Proof. Suppose that the choice rule f : P → C is Nash-implemented by
  a game form G = hN, (Ai ), gi, c ∈ f (%), and c ∈   / f (%0 ). Then there is
  an action profile a for which g(a) = c that is a Nash equilibrium of the
  game hG, %i but not of hG, %0 i. That is, there is a player j and action
  a0j ∈ Aj such that g(a−j , a0j ) 0j g(a) and g(a) %j g(a−j , a0j ). Hence f is
  monotonic.                                                                   2
 Example 186.3 (Solomon’s predicament) The biblical story of the Judg-
  ment of Solomon illustrates some of the main ideas of implementation
  theory. Each of two women, 1 and 2, claims a baby; each of them knows
  10.4 Nash Implementation                                                 187



  who is the true mother, but neither can prove her motherhood. Solomon
  tries to educe the truth by threatening to cut the baby in two, relying
  on the fact that the false mother prefers this outcome to that in which
  the true mother obtains the baby while the true mother prefers to give
  the baby away than to see it cut in two. Solomon can give the baby to
  either of the mothers or order its execution.
     Formally, let a be the outcome in which the baby is given to mother 1,
  b that in which the baby is given to mother 2, and d that in which the
  baby is cut in two. Two preference profiles are possible:
           θ (1 is the real mother): a 1 b 1 d and b 2 d 2 a
           θ0 (2 is the real mother): a 01 d 01 b and b 02 a 02 d.
  Despite Solomon’s alleged wisdom, the choice rule f defined by f (θ) =
  {a} and f (θ0 ) = {b} is not Nash-implementable, since it is not mono-
                         / f (θ0 ) but there is no outcome y and player i ∈ N
  tonic: a ∈ f (θ) and a ∈
  such that a %i y and y 0i a. (In the biblical story Solomon succeeds in
  assigning the baby to the true mother: he gives it to the only woman to
  announce that she prefers that it be given to the other woman than be
  cut in two. Probably the women did not perceive Solomon’s instructions
  as a strategic game form.)
    The next result provides sufficient conditions for a choice rule to be
  Nash-implementable.
I Definition 187.1 A choice rule f : P → C has no veto power if
  c ∈ f (%) whenever for at least |N | − 1 players we have c %i y for all
  y ∈ C.

  Proposition 187.2 Let hN, C, P, Gi be an environment in which G is
  the set of strategic game forms. If |N | ≥ 3 then any choice rule that is
  monotonic and has no veto power is Nash-implementable.
  Proof. Let f : P → C be a monotonic choice rule that has no veto power.
  We construct a game form G = hN, (Ai ), gi that Nash-implements f as
  follows. The set of actions Ai of each player i is the set of all triples
  (pi , ci , mi ), where pi ∈ P, ci ∈ C, and mi is a nonnegative integer. The
  values g((pi , ci , mi )i∈N ) of the outcome function are defined as follows.
    •   If for some j ∈ N and some (%, c, m) with c ∈ f (%) we have
        (pi , ci , mi ) = (%, c, m) for all i ∈ N \ {j} then
                                                   
                                                     cj if c %j cj
                              g((pi , ci , mi )) =
                                                     c if c ≺j cj .
188                                        Chapter 10. Implementation Theory


   •   Otherwise g((pi , ci , mi )) = ck where k is such that mk ≥ mj for all
       j ∈ N (in the case of a tie the identity of k is immaterial).
   This game form has three components. First, if all the players agree
about the preference profile % and the outcome c ∈ f (%) to be im-
plemented then the outcome is indeed c. Second, if there is almost
agreement—all players but one agree—then the majority prevails unless
the exceptional player announces an outcome that, under the preference
relation announced by the majority, is not better for him than the out-
come announced by the majority (which persuades the planner that the
preference relation announced for him by the others is incorrect). Third,
if there is significant disagreement then the law of the jungle applies: the
player who “shouts loudest” chooses the outcome.
   We now show that this game form Nash-implements f . Let c ∈ f (%)
for some % ∈ P. Let ai = (%, c, 0) for each i ∈ N . Then (ai ) is a Nash
equilibrium of the game hG, %i with the outcome c: any deviation by any
player j, say to (%0 , c0 , m0 ), that affects the outcome has the property
that the outcome is c0 ≺j c.
   Now let (a∗i ) be a Nash equilibrium of the game hG, %i with the
outcome c∗ . We show that c∗ ∈ f (%).
   There are three cases to consider. First suppose that a∗i = (%0 , c∗ , m0 )
for all i ∈ N and c∗ ∈ f (%0 ). If c∗ ∈     / f (%) then the monotonicity of
f implies that there is a player i ∈ N and b ∈ C such that c∗ %0i b
and b i c∗ . But then the deviation by player i to the action (%, b, 0)
changes the action profile to one that yields his preferable outcome b.
Hence c∗ ∈ f (%).
   Second suppose that a∗i = (%0 , c∗ , m0 ) for all i ∈ N and c∗ ∈     / f (%0 ). If
there is some i ∈ N and outcome b ∈ C such that b i c∗ then player i
can deviate to (%0 , b, m00 ) for some m00 > m0 , yielding the preferred
outcome b. Thus c∗ is a favorite outcome of every player; since f has no
veto power we have c∗ ∈ f (%).
   Third suppose that a∗i 6= a∗j for some players i and j. We show that
for at least |N |−1 players c∗ is a favorite outcome, so that since f has no
veto power we have c∗ ∈ f (%). Since |N | ≥ 3 there exists h ∈ N \ {i, j};
a∗h is different from either a∗i or a∗j , say a∗h 6= a∗i . If there is an outcome
b such that b k c∗ for some k ∈ N \ {i} then k can profitably deviate
by choosing (%0 , b, m00 ) for some m00 > m` for all ` 6= k. Thus for all
k ∈ N \ {i} we have c∗ %k b for all b ∈ C. (Note that player i, unlike
the other players, may not be able to achieve his favorite outcome by
deviating since all the other players might be in agreement.)                      2
 10.4 Nash Implementation                                                   189



    The interest of a result of this type, like that of the folk theorems in
 Chapter 8, depends on the reasonableness of the game form constructed
 in the proof. A natural component of the game form constructed here
 is that a complaint against a consensus is accepted only if the suggested
 alternative is worse for the complainant under the preference profile
 claimed by the other players. A less natural component is the “shouting”
 part of the game form, especially since shouting bears no cost here.
    The strength of the result depends on the size of the set of choice rules
 that are monotonic and have no veto power. If there are at least three
 alternatives and P is the set of all preference profiles then no mono-
 tonic choice function has no veto power. (This follows from Muller and
 Satterthwaite (1977, Corollary on p. 417); note that a monotonic choice
 function satisfies Muller and Satterthwaite’s condition SPA.) Thus the
 proposition is of interest only for either a nondegenerate choice rule or
 a choice function with a limited domain.
    The game form in the proof of the proposition is designed to cover all
 possible choice rules. A specific choice rule may be implemented by a
 game form that is much simpler. Two examples follow.
 Example 189.1 Suppose that an object is to be assigned to a player in
  the set {1, . . . , n}. Assume first that for all possible preference profiles
  there is a single player who prefers to have the object than not to have
  it. The choice function that assigns the object to this player can be
  implemented by the game form in which the set of actions of each player
  is {Yes, No} and the outcome function assigns the object to the player
  with the lowest index who announces Yes if there is such a player, and
  to player n otherwise. It is easy to check that if player i is the one who
  prefers to have the object than not to have it then the only equilibrium
  outcome is that i gets the object.
     Now assume that in each preference profile there are two (“privileged”)
  players who prefer to have the object than to not have it, and that we
  want to implement the choice rule that assigns to each preference profile
  the two outcomes in which the object is assigned to one of these players.
  The game form just described does not work since, for example, for the
  profile in which these players are 1 and 2 there is no equilibrium in which
  player 2 gets the object. The following game form does implement the
  rule. Each player announces a name of a player and a number. If n − 1
  players announce the same name, say i, then i obtains the object unless
  he names a different player, say j, in which case j obtains the object.
  In any other case the player who names the largest number gets the
  190                                        Chapter 10. Implementation Theory



                                Mine         Hers        Mine+

                     Mine      (0, , )    (1, 0, 0)   (2, , M )

                        His    (2, 0, 0)    (0, , )    (0, 0, 0)

                   Mine+       (1, M, )    (0, 0, 0)   (0, 2, 2)

  Figure 190.1 A game form that implements the choice function considered in Ex-
  ample 190.1 in which the legitimate owner obtains the object. (Note that the entries
  in the boxes are outcomes, not payoffs.)


  object. Any action profile in which all players announce the name of
  the same privileged player is an equilibrium. Any other action profile is
  not an equilibrium, since if at least n − 1 players agree on a player who
  is not privileged then that player can deviate profitably by announcing
  somebody else; if there is no set of n − 1 players who agree then there is
  at least one privileged player who can deviate profitably by announcing
  a larger number than anyone else.
 Example 190.1 (Solomon’s predicament) Consider again Solomon’s
  predicament, described in Example 186.3. Assume that the object of
  dispute has monetary value to the two players and that Solomon may
  assign the object to one of the players, or to neither of them, and may
  also impose fines on them. The set of outcomes is then the set of triples
  (x, m1 , m2 ) where either x = 0 (the object is not given to either player)
  or x ∈ {1, 2} (the object is given to player x) and mi is a fine imposed
  on player i. Player i’s payoff if he gets the object is vH − mi if he
  is the legitimate owner of the object and vL − mi if he is not, where
  vH > vL > 0; it is −mi if he does not get the object. There are two
  possible preference profiles, % in which player 1 is the legitimate owner
  and %0 in which player 2 is.
     King Solomon wishes to implement the choice function f for which
  f (%) = (1, 0, 0) and f (%0 ) = (2, 0, 0). This function is monotonic: for
  example (1, 0, 0) 2 (2, 0, (vH +vL )/2) and (2, 0, (vH +vL )/2) 02 (1, 0, 0).
  Proposition 187.2 does not apply since there are only two players. How-
  ever, the following game form (which is simpler than that in the proof
  of the proposition) implements f : each player has three actions, and the
  outcome function is that given in Figure 190.1, where M = (vH + vL )/2
  and  > 0 is small enough. (The action “Mine+” can be interpreted
 10.5 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium Implementation                              191


                         1 b mine 2r mine        r (2, , M )
                       his         hers
                           r             r
                       (2, 0, 0)    (1, 0, 0)

 Figure 191.1 An extensive game form that implements the choice function given
 in Example 190.1. The vector near each terminal history is the outcome associated
 with that history.


 as an impudent demand for the object, which is penalized if the other
 player does not dispute the ownership.)
    Given our interest in the structure of the game forms that we con-
 struct, the fact that the game form in this example is simple and lacks a
 “shouting” component is attractive. In the next section (see Exam-
 ple 191.2) we show that the choice function in the example can be
 implemented by an even simpler scheme.
? Exercise 191.1    Consider the case in which there are two individuals.
 Let N = {1, 2} and C = {a, b, c}, and suppose that there are two possible
 preference profiles, % with a 1 c 1 b and c 2 b 2 a and %0 with
 c 01 a 01 b and b 02 c 02 a. Show that the choice function f defined
 by f (%) = a and f (%0 ) = b is monotonic but not Nash-implementable.


 10.5    Subgame Perfect Equilibrium Implementation

 Finally, we turn to the case in which the planner uses extensive game
 forms with perfect information and assumes that for any preference pro-
 file the outcome of the game may be any subgame perfect equilibrium
 (SPE). To motivate the possibilities for implementing choice rules in this
 case, consider Solomon’s quandary once again.
 Example 191.2 (Solomon’s predicament) The choice function f given
  in the previous example (190.1) is SPE-implemented by the following
  game form. First player 1 is asked whether the object is hers. If she
  says “no” then the object is given to player 2. If she says “yes” then
  player 2 is asked if he is the owner. If he says “no” then the object is
  given to player 1, while if he says “yes” then he obtains the object and
  must pay a fine of M satisfying vL < M < vH while player 1 has to
  pay a small fine  > 0. This game form is illustrated in Figure 191.1 (in
  which outcomes, not payoffs, are shown near the terminal histories).
192                                    Chapter 10. Implementation Theory



  If player 1 is the legitimate owner (i.e. the preference profile is %) then
the game has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium, in which player 2
chooses “hers” and player 1 chooses “mine”, achieving the desirable
outcome (1, 0, 0). If player 2 is the real owner then the game has a
unique subgame perfect equilibrium, in which he chooses “mine” and
player 1 chooses “his”, yielding the outcome (2, 0, 0). Thus the game
SPE-implements the choice function given in Example 190.1.
  The key idea in the game form described in this example is that
player 2 is confronted with a choice that leads him to choose truth-
fully. If he does so then player 1 is faced with a choice that leads her
to choose truthfully also. The tricks used in the literature to construct
game forms to SPE-implement choice functions in other contexts are in
the same spirit. In the remainder of the chapter we present a result that
demonstrates the richness of the possibilities for SPE-implementation.
  Let C ∗ be a set of deterministic consequences. We study the case in
which the set C of outcomes has the form

       C = {(L, m): L is a lottery over C ∗ and m ∈ RN }.            (192.1)

If (L, m) ∈ C then we interpret mi as a fine paid by player i. (Note that
mi is not transferred to another player.)
   We assume that for each player i there is a payoff function ui : C ∗ → R
such that player i’s preference relation over C is represented by the
function EL (ui (c∗ )) − mi ; we identify a preference profile with a profile
(ui )i∈N of such payoff functions and denote EL ui (c∗ ) simply by ui (L).
We assume further that P = U N , where U is a finite set that excludes
the constant function. The set G of game forms that we consider is the
set of extensive game forms with perfect information with consequences
in C.
   The notion of implementation that we explore is weaker than those
studied previously: we construct a game form Γ ∈ G with the property
that for any preference profile u ∈ P the game hΓ, ui has a unique
subgame perfect equilibrium in which the desired alternative is realized
with very high probability, though not necessarily with certainty. More
precisely, we say that a choice function f : P → C ∗ is virtually SPE-
implementable if for any  > 0 there is an extensive game form Γ ∈ G
such that for any preference profile u ∈ P the extensive game hΓ, ui
has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium, in which the outcome is f (u)
with probability at least 1 − .
10.5 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium Implementation                                    193



Proposition 193.1 Let C ∗ be a set of deterministic consequences. Let
hN, C, P, Gi be an environment in which |N | ≥ 3, C is given by (192.1),
P = U N , where U is the (finite) set of payoff functions described above,
and G is the set of extensive game forms with perfect information and
consequences in C. Then every choice function f : P → C ∗ is virtually
SPE-implementable.
Proof. First note that since for no payoff function in U are all out-
comes indifferent, for any pair (v, v 0 ) of distinct payoff functions there
is a pair (L(v, v 0 ), L0 (v, v 0 )) of lotteries over C ∗ such that v(L(v, v 0 )) >
v(L0 (v, v 0 )) and v 0 (L0 (v, v 0 )) > v 0 (L(v, v 0 )). (A player’s choice between
the lotteries L(v, v 0 ) and L0 (v, v 0 ) thus indicates whether his payoff func-
tion is v or v 0 .) For any triple (u, v, v 0 ) of payoff functions let L∗ (u, v, v 0 )
be the member of the set {L(v, v 0 ), L0 (v, v 0 )} that is preferred by u.
Then for any pair (v, v 0 ) of payoff functions we have u(L∗ (u, v, v 0 )) =
max{u(L(v, v 0 )), u(L0 (v, v 0 ))}, so that u(L∗ (u, v, v 0 )) ≥ u(L∗ (u0 , v, v 0 ))
for any payoff function u0 . Further, u(L∗ (u, u, u0 )) > u(L∗ (u0 , u, u0 )).
   Now suppose that for some pair (v, v 0 ) a player who announces the
payoff function u is given the lottery L∗ (u, v, v 0 ). Let B be the minimum,
over all pairs (u, u0 ) of distinct payoff functions, of the average gain, over
all pairs (v, v 0 ), of any player with payoff function u from announcing u
rather than u0 :
                                                                                  
                          1      X
     B = min                           {u(L∗ (u, v, v 0 )) − u(L∗ (u0 , v, v 0 ))} ,
             (u,u0 )∈W   M         0
                           (v,v )∈W

where W is the set of all pairs of distinct payoff functions and M =
|U |(|U | − 1) (the number of members of W). By the argument above we
have B > 0.
   For every  > 0 we construct a game form that has K + 1 stages
(K being defined below). Each stage consists of |N | substages. Let
N = {1, . . . , n}. In substage i of each of the first K stages player i
announces a preference profile (a member of U N ); in substage i of stage
K + 1 player i announces a payoff function (a member of U ).
   For any terminal history the outcome, which consists of a lottery and
a profile of fines, is defined as follows. Each stage k for k = 1, . . . , K
contributes to the lottery a consequence with probability (1−)/K. If in
stage k all the players except possibly one announce the same preference
profile, say (ui ), then this consequence is f ((ui )); otherwise it is some
fixed consequence c∗ ∈ C ∗ .
194                                       Chapter 10. Implementation Theory



   Each substage of the last stage contributes the probability /|N | to the
lottery. This probability is split into M equal parts, each corresponding
to a pair of payoff functions. The probability /|N |M that corresponds
to (i, (v, v 0 )) ∈ N × W is assigned to the lottery L∗ (u0i , v, v 0 ), where u0i
is the payoff function that player i announces in stage K + 1.
   As for the fines, a player has to pay δ > 0 if he is the last player in the
first K stages to announce a preference profile different from the profile
of announcements in stage K + 1. In addition, a player has to pay a
fine of δ/K for each stage in the first K in which all the other players
announce the same profile, different from the one that he announces.
(In order for the odd player out to be well-defined we need at least three
players.)
   Finally, we choose δ so that B/|N | > δ and K so that (1 − )D/K +
δ/K < δ, where

           D = max0 {v(c) − v(c0 ): v ∈ U , c ∈ C ∗ , and c0 ∈ C ∗ }.
                 v,c,c


   We now show that for any (ui ) ∈ U N the game hΓ, (ui )i, where Γ is the
game form described above, has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium,
in which the outcome is f ((ui )) with probability at least 1 − . We
first show that after every history in every subgame perfect equilibrium
each player i announces his true payoff function in stage K + 1. If
player i announces a false payoff function at this stage then, relative to
the case in which he announces his true payoff function, there are two
changes in the outcome. First, the lotteries contributed to the outcome
by substage i of stage K + 1 change, reducing player i’s expected payoff
by at least B/|N |. Second, player i may avoid a fine of δ if by changing
his announcement in the last period he avoids being the last player to
announce a preference profile in one of the first K stages that is different
from the profile of announcements in the final stage. Since B/|N | > δ
the net effect is that the best action for any player is to announce his
true payoff function in the final period, whatever history precedes his
decision.
   We now show that in any subgame perfect equilibrium all players
announce the true preference profile (ui ) in each of the first K stages.
Suppose to the contrary that some player does not do so; let player i
in stage k be the last player not to do so. We argue that player i
can increase his payoff by deviating and announcing the true preference
profile (ui ). There are two cases to consider.
Notes                                                                     195


  •   If no other player announces a profile different from (ui ) in stage k
      then player i’s deviation has no effect on the outcome; it reduces the
      fine he has to pay by δ/K, since he no longer announces a profile
      different from that announced by the other players, and may further
      reduce his fine by δ (if he is no longer the last player to announce
      a profile different from (ui )).
  •   If some other player announces a profile different from (ui ) in stage k
      then the component of the final lottery attributable to stage k may
      change, reducing player i’s payoff by at most (1 − )D/K. In ad-
      dition he may become the odd player out at stage k and be fined
      δ/K. At the same time he avoids the fine δ (since he is definitely
      not the last player to announce a profile different from (ui )). Since
      (1 − )D/K + δ/K < δ, the net effect is that the deviation is
      profitable.
  We conclude that in every subgame perfect equilibrium every player,
after every history at which he has to announce a preference profile,
announces the true preference profile, so that the outcome of the game
assigns probability of at least 1 −  to f ((ui )).                  2
   The game form constructed in this proof is based on two ideas. Stage
K + 1 is designed so that it is dominant for every player to announce his
true payoff function. In the earlier stages a player may wish to announce
a preference profile different from the true one, since by doing so he may
affect the final outcome to his advantage; but no player wants to be the
last to do so, with the consequence that no player ever does so.

Notes

The Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem (181.2) appears in Gibbard (1973)
and Satterthwaite (1975). For alternative proofs see Schmeidler and Son-
nenschein (1978) and Barberá (1983). Proposition 184.2 is due to Groves
and Loeb (1975); the result in Exercise 185.1 is due to Green and Laf-
font (1977). Maskin first proved Proposition 187.2 (see Maskin (1985));
the proof that we give is due to Repullo (1987). The discussion in
Section 10.5 is based on Abreu and Matsushima (1992), who prove a
result equivalent to Proposition 193.1 for implementation via iterated
elimination of strictly dominated strategies in strategic game forms; the
variant that we present is that of Glazer and Perry (1996). The analy-
sis of Solomon’s predicament in Examples 186.3, 190.1, and 191.2 first
appeared in Glazer and Ma (1989).
196                                 Chapter 10. Implementation Theory



  For a characterization of choice functions that are SPE-implementable
see Moore and Repullo (1988).
  In writing this chapter we benefited from Moore (1992) (a survey of
the literature) and from unpublished lecture notes by Repullo.
III Extensive Games with Imperfect
    Information




The model of an extensive game with imperfect information allows a
player, when taking an action, to have only partial information about
the actions taken previously. The model is rich; it encompasses not only
situations in which a player is imperfectly informed about the other
players’ previous actions, but also, for example, situations in which dur-
ing the course of the game a player forgets an action that he previously
took and situations in which a player is uncertain about whether another
player has acted.
   We devote Chapter 11 to an exploration of the concept of an extensive
game with imperfect information, leaving until Chapter 12 a study of the
main solution concept for such games, namely the notion of sequential
equilibrium.
11         Extensive Games with Imperfect
           Information




In this chapter we explore the concept of an extensive game with im-
perfect information, in which each player, when taking an action, may
have only partial information about the actions taken previously.

11.1     Extensive Games with Imperfect Information

11.1.1   Introduction
In each of the models we studied previously there is a sense in which
the players are not perfectly informed when making their choices. In
a strategic game a player, when taking an action, does not know the
actions that the other players take. In a Bayesian game a player knows
neither the other players’ private information nor the actions that they
take. In an extensive game with perfect information a player does not
know the future moves planned by the other players.
   The model that we study here—an extensive game with imperfect
information—differs in that the players may in addition be imperfectly
informed about some (or all) of the choices that have already been made.
We analyze the model by assuming, as we did previously, that each
player, when choosing an action, forms an expectation about the un-
knowns. However, these expectations differ from those we considered
before. Unlike those in strategic games, they are not derived solely from
the players’ equilibrium behavior, since the players may face situations
inconsistent with that behavior. Unlike those in Bayesian games, they
are not deduced solely from the equilibrium behavior and the exogenous
information about the moves of chance. Finally, unlike those in exten-
sive games with perfect information, they relate not only to the other
players’ future behavior but also to events that happened in the past.
  200                   Chapter 11. Extensive Games with Imperfect Information



  11.1.2       Definitions
  The following definition generalizes that of an extensive game with per-
  fect information (89.1) to allow players to be imperfectly informed about
  past events when taking actions. It also allows for exogenous uncer-
  tainty: some moves may be made by “chance” (see Section 6.3.1). It
  does not incorporate the other generalization of the definition of an ex-
  tensive game with perfect information that we discussed in Section 6.3,
  in which more than one player may move after any history (see however
  the discussion after Example 202.1).
I Definition 200.1 An extensive game has the following components.
   •    A finite set N (the set of players).
   •    A set H of sequences (finite or infinite) that satisfies the following
        three properties.
         ◦   The empty sequence ∅ is a member of H.
         ◦   If (ak )k=1,...,K ∈ H (where K may be infinite) and L < K then
             (ak )k=1,...,L ∈ H.
         ◦   If an infinite sequence (ak )∞               k
                                          k=1 satisfies (a )k=1,...,L ∈ H for every
             positive integer L then (ak )∞k=1 ∈ H.
        (Each member of H is a history; each component of a history is an
        action taken by a player.) A history (ak )k=1,...,K ∈ H is terminal
        if it is infinite or if there is no aK+1 such that (ak )k=1,...,K+1 ∈ H.
        The set of actions available after the nonterminal history h is denoted
        A(h) = {a: (h, a) ∈ H} and the set of terminal histories is denoted Z.
   •    A function P that assigns to each nonterminal history (each member
        of H \ Z) a member of N ∪ {c}. (P is the player function, P (h)
        being the player who takes an action after the history h. If P (h) = c
        then chance determines the action taken after the history h.)
   •    A function fc that associates with every history h for which P (h) = c
        a probability measure fc (·|h) on A(h), where each such probability
        measure is independent of every other such measure. (fc (a|h) is the
        probability that a occurs after the history h.)
   •    For each player i ∈ N a partition Ii of {h ∈ H: P (h) = i} with
        the property that A(h) = A(h0 ) whenever h and h0 are in the same
        member of the partition. For Ii ∈ Ii we denote by A(Ii ) the set A(h)
        and by P (Ii ) the player P (h) for any h ∈ Ii . (Ii is the information
        partition of player i; a set Ii ∈ Ii is an information set of player i.)
11.1 Extensive Games with Imperfect Information                        201


 •   For each player i ∈ N a preference relation %i on lotteries over Z
     (the preference relation of player i) that can be represented as the
     expected value of a payoff function defined on Z.
We refer to a tuple hN, H, P, fc , (Ii )i∈N i (which excludes the players’
preferences) whose components satisfy the conditions in the definition
as an extensive game form.
   Relative to the definition of an extensive game with perfect infor-
mation and chance moves (see Section 6.3.1), the new element is the
collection (Ii )i∈N of information partitions. We interpret the histories
in any given member of Ii to be indistinguishable to player i. Thus the
game models a situation in which after any history h ∈ Ii ∈ Ii player i is
informed that some history in Ii has occurred but is not informed that
the history h has occurred. The condition that A(h) = A(h0 ) when-
ever h and h0 are in the same member of Ii captures the idea that if
A(h) 6= A(h0 ) then player i could deduce, when he faced A(h), that the
history was not h0 , contrary to our interpretation of Ii . (Note that Def-
inition 200.1, unlike the standard definition of an extensive game, does
not rule out the possibility that an information set contains two histo-
ries h and h0 where h0 = (h, a1 , . . . , aK ) for some sequence of actions
(a1 , . . . , aK ).)
   Each player’s information partition is a primitive of the game; a player
can distinguish between histories in different members of his partition
without having to make any inferences from the actions that he observes.
As the game is played, a participant may be able, given his conjectures
about the other players’ behavior, to make inferences that refine this
information. Suppose, for example, that the first move of a game is
made by player 1, who chooses between a and b, and the second move is
made by player 2, one of whose information sets is {a, b}. We interpret
this game to model a situation in which player 2 does not observe the
choice of player 1: when making his move, he is not informed whether
player 1 chose a or b. Nevertheless, when making his move player 2 may
infer (from his knowledge of a steady state or from introspection about
player 1) that the history is a, even though he does not observe the
action chosen by player 1.
   Each player’s preference relation is defined over lotteries on the set
of terminal histories, since even if the players’ actions are deterministic
the chance moves that the model allows induce such lotteries.
   Note that Definition 200.1 extends our definition of an extensive game
with perfect information and chance moves (see Section 6.3.1) in the
 202              Chapter 11. Extensive Games with Imperfect Information


                                                          1b
                                                L  HH R
                                        2 r                       Hr
                                                              H
                                                                  H
                               A         H   H    B               2, 1
                         prpp p p p p p 1p p p p p p p
                                                      Hp Hr
                                                 H
                     `   @r                          ` @r
                   r          @@r                  r         @r
                                                             @
                 0, 0           1, 2             1, 2         0, 0

          Figure 202.1 An extensive game with imperfect information.


 sense that the extensive game with perfect information and chance moves
 hN, H, P, fc , (%i )i∈N i may naturally be identified with the extensive
 game hN, H, P, fc , (Ii )i∈N , (%i )i∈N i in which every member of the in-
 formation partition of every player is a singleton.
 Example 202.1 Figure 202.1 shows an example of an extensive game
  with imperfect information. In this game player 1 moves first, choosing
  between L and R. If she chooses R, the game ends. If she chooses L,
  player 2 moves; he is informed that player 1 chose L, and chooses A
  or B. In either case it is player 1’s turn to move, and when doing so
  she is not informed whether player 2 chose A or B, a fact indicated in
  the figure by the dotted line connecting the ends of the histories after
  which player 1 has to move for the second time, choosing an action from
  the set {`, r}. Formally, we have P (∅) = P (L, A) = P (L, B) = 1,
  P (L) = 2, I1 = {{∅}, {(L, A), (L, B)}}, and I2 = {{L}} (player 1 has
  two information sets and player 2 has one). The numbers under the
  terminal histories are the players’ payoffs. (The first number in each
  pair is player 1’s payoff and the second is player 2’s payoff.)
    In Definition 200.1 we do not allow more than one player to move after
 any history. However, there is a sense in which an extensive game as
 we have defined it can model such a situation. To see this, consider the
 example above. After player 1 chooses L, the situation in which players 1
 and 2 are involved is essentially the same as that captured by a game
 with perfect information in which they choose actions simultaneously.
 (This is the reason that in much of the literature the definition of an
 extensive game with perfect information does not include the possibility
 of simultaneous moves.)
    A player’s strategy in an extensive game with perfect information
 is a function that specifies an action for every history after which the
 player chooses an action (Definition 92.1). The following definition is
  11.1 Extensive Games with Imperfect Information                                      203


                                         cb
                  b                                                         1b
              p pp @     1 r
                                  PPP
                                                     Pr1
         r p p 1 @r
                                                   P                       @
                       r
                            @
                              @pr p p p p1 p p p p r
                                                       @
                                                         @r       pr p p p p1 p p @
                                                                                  p p
                                                                                   @r
    r        @r
         @
                                                              r       @r r             @r
                                                                  @                   @
                            r      @r r              @r
                                @                  @


        Figure 203.1 Three one-player extensive games with imperfect recall.


  an extension to a general extensive game; since we later consider the
  possibility that the players may randomize, we add the qualifier “pure”.
I Definition 203.1 A pure strategy of player i ∈ N in an extensive
  game hN, H, P, fc , (Ii ), (%i )i is a function that assigns an action in A(Ii )
  to each information set Ii ∈ Ii .
     As for an extensive game with perfect information, we can associate
  with any extensive game a strategic game; see the definitions of the
  strategic form (94.1) and reduced strategic form (95.1). (Note that the
  outcome of a strategy profile here may be a lottery over the terminal
  histories, since we allow moves of chance.)

  11.1.3    Perfect and Imperfect Recall
  The model of an extensive game is capable of capturing a wide range of
  informational environments. In particular, it can capture situations in
  which at some points players forget what they knew earlier. We refer
  to games in which at every point every player remembers whatever he
  knew in the past as games with perfect recall. To define such games
  formally, let hN, H, P, fc , (Ii )i be an extensive game form and let Xi (h)
  be the record of player i’s experience along the history h: Xi (h) is the
  sequence consisting of the information sets that the player encounters
  in the history h and the actions that he takes at them, in the order
  that these events occur. In the game in Figure 202.1, for example,
  X1 ((L, A)) = (∅, L, {(L, A), (L, B)}).
? Exercise 203.2       Give a formal definition of Xi (h).
I Definition 203.3 An extensive game form has perfect recall if for
  each player i we have Xi (h) = Xi (h0 ) whenever the histories h and h0
  are in the same information set of player i.
    The game in Figure 202.1 has perfect recall, while the three (one-
  player) game forms in Figure 203.1 do not. In the left-hand game a
  player does not know if she has made a choice or not: when choosing an
204               Chapter 11. Extensive Games with Imperfect Information


                      1b
                                                 1b
                  1r   @
                         @r                      HH
                                           r     r  Hr
                                              
                          o3                        H
                r    @r
                   @
                                          o1     o2   o3
               o1     o2

Figure 204.1 Two distinct one-player extensive games that appear to model the
same situation.


action she does not know whether she is at the beginning of the game or
has already chosen her left-hand action. In the middle game the player
forgets something that she previously knew: when making a choice at
her last information set she is not informed of the action of chance,
though she was so informed when she made her previous choice. In the
right-hand game she does not remember the action she took in the past.
   The literature on games with imperfect recall is very small. An ex-
ample of a game theoretic treatment of a situation with imperfect recall
is that of the machine games in Chapter 9. In the underlying repeated
game that a machine game models, each player, when taking an action,
is not informed of past events, including his own previous actions. The
size of his memory depends on the structure of his machine. More mem-
ory requires more states; since states are costly, even in equilibrium a
player still may imperfectly recall his own past actions.


11.2   Principles for the Equivalence of Extensive Games

Some extensive games appear to represent the same strategic situation as
others. Consider, for example, the two one-player games in Figure 204.1.
(In these games, as in the others in this section, we associate letters
with terminal histories. If two terminal histories are assigned the same
letter then the two histories represent the same event; in particular, all
the players are indifferent between them.) Formally, the two games are
different: in the left-hand game player 1 makes two decisions, while in the
right-hand game she makes only one. However, principles of rationality
suggest that the two games model the same situation.
   We now give further examples of pairs of games that arguably repre-
sent the same situation and discuss some principles that generalize these
examples. We do not argue that these principles should be taken as ax-
ioms; we simply believe that studying them illuminates the meaning of
an extensive game, especially one with imperfect information.
11.2 Principles for the Equivalence of Extensive Games                         205


                                   1b
                           `  HHr 2
                                  
                                            HHrH
                                      `H         HHrH
                   1 r         0 prpp 0p p p 1p p p pH p p
                                                            Hr
                 A @B          ` @r                      `0 @r0
                 r     @r      r       @r                r     @r
                o1      o2    o3         o4            o5       o6

                          Figure 205.1 The game Γ1 .

                                              1b
                                           HHr
                                ` 
                                       
                                                        HHrH 2
                                                  `H       HHrH
                      prp
                          p p p p p p p p p 1p pr
                                                 p p p p p p p p H  Hr
                                                                  p p p
                 r        @r            r          @r             r      @r
                        @                      @                        @
                o1         o2          o3            o4          o5       o6

Figure 205.2 The game Γ2 , equivalent to Γ1 according to the inflation–deflation
principle.


   The four principles that we consider all preserve the reduced strategic
form of the game: if one extensive game is equivalent to another accord-
ing to the principles then the reduced strategic forms of the two games
are the same. Thus a solution concept that does not depend solely on the
reduced strategic form may assign different outcomes to games that are
equivalent according to the principles; to justify such a solution concept
one has to argue that at least one of the principles is inappropriate.
   Let Γ1 be the game in Figure 205.1. The principles that we discuss
claim that this game is equivalent to four other extensive games, as
follows.
 Inflation–Deflation According to this principle Γ1 is equivalent to the
game Γ2 in Figure 205.2. In Γ2 player 1 has imperfect recall: at her
second information set she is not informed whether she chose r or ` at
the start of the game. That is, the three histories `, (r, `), and (r, r)
are all in the same information set in Γ2 , while in Γ1 the history ` lies
in one information set and the histories (r, `) and (r, r) lie in another.
The interpretation that we have given to a game like Γ2 is that player 1,
when acting at the end of the game, has forgotten the action she took
at the beginning of the game. However, another interpretation of an
information set is that it represents the information about history that
is inherent in the structure of the game, information that may be refined
206                  Chapter 11. Extensive Games with Imperfect Information


                                                  1
                                      `        bXX r
                                                          XXX
                        prHp p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 
                                                  2                   Xp XrH
                                      
                               
              prpp p p p 1p p p p pHp
                                     Hr                        prpp p p p 1p p p p pHp
                                                                                      Hr
                               H                                               H

         r        @r              r       @r             r         @r              r      @r
              @                         @                      @                         @
        o1          o2           o1         o2          o3           o4           o5       o6

Figure 206.1 The game Γ3 , equivalent to Γ1 according to the principle of addition
of a superfluous move.


by inferences that the players may make. Under this interpretation a
player always remembers what he knew and did in the past and may
obtain information by making inferences from this knowledge. Indeed,
the argument that Γ1 and Γ2 are equivalent relies on the assumption
that player 1 is capable of making such inferences. The fact that she is
informed whether the history was ` or a member of {(r, `), (r, r)} is irrel-
evant to her strategic calculations, according to the argument, since in
any case she can infer this information from her knowledge of her action
at the start of the game. Under this interpretation it is inappropriate to
refer to a game like that in Figure 205.2 as having “imperfect recall”: the
information sets reflect imperfections in the information inherent in the
situation that can be overridden by the players’ abilities to remember
their past experience.
   Formally, according to the inflation–deflation principle the extensive
game Γ is equivalent to the extensive game Γ0 if Γ0 differs from Γ only in
that there is an information set of some player i in Γ that is a union of
information sets of player i in Γ0 with the following property: any two
histories h and h0 in different members of the union have subhistories
that are in the same information set of player i and player i’s action
at this information set is different in h and h0 . (To relate this to the
examples above, let Γ = Γ2 , Γ0 = Γ1 , and i = 1.)
 Addition of a Superfluous Move According to this principle Γ1 is equiv-
alent to the game Γ3 in Figure 206.1. The argument is as follows. If in
the game Γ3 player 1 chooses ` at the start of the game then the action
of player 2 is irrelevant, since it has no effect on the outcome (note the
outcomes in the bottom left-hand part of the game). Thus in Γ3 whether
player 2 is informed of player 1’s choice at the start of the game should
make no difference to his choice.
   Formally the principle of addition of a superfluous move is the follow-
ing. Let Γ be an extensive game, let P (h) = i, and let a ∈ A(h). Suppose
11.2 Principles for the Equivalence of Extensive Games                             207


                               1
                              bPP r
                         `A`B
                      r       r            rH
                                                  2
                                      PP
                                             P
                       1         2
                     o         o
                                   prpp p p p 1p p p p pHp
                                                          Hr
                                                    H

                                r      @r              r      @r
                                   @                         @
                               o3        o4           o5       o6

Figure 207.1 The game Γ4 , equivalent to Γ1 according to the principle of coalescing
of moves.


that for any sequence h0 of actions (including the empty sequence) that
follows the history (h, a) and for any b ∈ A(h) we have
   •   (h, a, h0 ) ∈ H if and only if (h, b, h0 ) ∈ H, and (h, a, h0 ) is terminal
       if and only if (h, b, h0 ) is terminal
   •   if both (h, a, h0 ) and (h, b, h0 ) are terminal then (h, a, h0 ) ∼i (h, b, h0 )
       for all i ∈ N
   •   if both (h, a, h0 ) and (h, b, h0 ) are nonterminal then they are in the
       same information set.
Then Γ is equivalent to the game Γ0 that differs from Γ only in that (i ) all
histories of the form (h, c, h0 ) for c ∈ A(h) are replaced by the single
history (h, h0 ), (ii ) if the information set Ii that contains the history h
in Γ is not a singleton then h is excluded from Ii in Γ0 , (iii ) the player
who is assigned to the history (h, h0 ) in Γ0 is the one who is assigned to
(h, a, h0 ) in Γ, (iv ) (h, h0 ) and (h, h00 ) are in the same information set of
Γ0 if and only if (h, a, h0 ) and (h, a, h00 ) are in the same information set
of Γ, and (v ) the players’ preferences are modified accordingly. (Note
that Γ is the game that has the superfluous move, which is removed to
create Γ0 . To relate the definition to Γ1 and Γ3 , let Γ = Γ3 , Γ0 = Γ1 ,
i = 2, and h = `, and let a be one of the actions of player 2.)
 Coalescing of Moves According to this principle, Γ1 is equivalent to
the game Γ4 in Figure 207.1. In Γ1 player 1 first chooses between `
and r, then chooses between A and B in the event that she chooses `.
The idea is that this decision problem is equivalent to that of deciding
between `A, `B, and r, as in Γ4 . The argument is that if player 1 is
rational then her choice at the start of Γ1 requires her to compare the
outcomes of choosing ` and r; to determine the outcome of choosing `
requires her to plan at the start of the game whether to choose A or B.
  Formally the principle of coalescing of moves is the following. Let Γ
be an extensive game and let P (h) = i, with h ∈ Ii . Let a ∈ A(Ii ) and
 208               Chapter 11. Extensive Games with Imperfect Information


                                   1b
                            `  HHr 1
                                  
                                            H
                                         `0H
                                              HrH 0
                                                   HHr
                    1 r           prpp p p p 2p p p pHpHp
                                                           Hr
                  A @B           ` @r                     ` @r
                  r     @r      r       @r               r    @r
                 o1      o2    o3         o5           o4      o6

 Figure 208.1 The game Γ5 , equivalent to Γ1 according to the principle of inter-
 change of moves.


 suppose that {(h0 , a): h0 ∈ Ii } = Ii0 is an information set of player i. Let
 Γ0 be the game that differs from Γ only in that the information set Ii0
 is deleted, for all h0 ∈ Ii the history (h0 , a) is deleted and every history
 (h0 , a, b, h00 ) where b ∈ A(h0 , a) is replaced by the history (h0 , ab, h00 )
 where ab is a new action (that is not a member of A(h0 )), and the
 information sets, player function, and players’ preferences are changed
 accordingly. Then Γ and Γ0 are equivalent. (In the example let Γ = Γ1 ,
 Γ0 = Γ4 , h = ∅, i = 1, and a = `.)
  Interchange of Moves According to this principle Γ1 is equivalent to
 the game Γ5 in Figure 208.1. The idea is that the order of play is
 immaterial if one player does not have any information about the other
 player’s action when making his choice.
    Formally the principle of interchange of moves is the following (which
 allows transformations more general than that from Γ1 to Γ5 ). Let Γ be
 an extensive game and let h ∈ Ii , an information set of player i. Suppose
 that for all histories h0 in some subset H 0 of Ii the player who takes an
 action after i has done so is j, who is not informed of the action that
 i takes at h0 . That is, suppose that (h0 , a) ∈ Ij for all h0 ∈ H 0 and all
 a ∈ A(h0 ), where Ij is an information set of player j. The information
 set Ij may contain other histories; let H 00 be the subset of Ij consisting of
 histories of the form (h0 , a) for some h0 ∈ H 0 . Then Γ is equivalent to the
 extensive game in which every history of the type (h0 , a, b) for h0 ∈ H 0
 is replaced by (h0 , b, a), the information set Ii of player i is replaced
 by the union of Ii \ H 0 and all histories of the form (h0 , b) for h0 ∈ H 0
 and b ∈ A(h0 , a), and the information set Ij of player j is replaced by
 (Ij \ H 00 ) ∪ H 0 . (In the example we have Γ = Γ1 , Γ0 = Γ5 , h = r, i = 2,
 j = 1, H 0 = I2 = {r}, and H 00 = I1 = {(r, `), (r, r)}.)
? Exercise 208.1     Formulate the principles of coalescing of moves and
 inflation–deflation for one-player extensive games and show that every
11.3 Framing Effects and the Equivalence of Extensive Games             209



one-player extensive game with imperfect information and no chance
moves (but possibly with imperfect recall) in which no information set
contains both a history h and a subhistory of h is equivalent to a decision
problem with a single nonterminal history. (The result holds even for
games with chance moves, which are excluded only for simplicity.)
   Thompson (1952) shows that these four transformations preserve the
reduced strategic form. He restricts attention to finite extensive games
in which no information set contains both a history h and some subhis-
tory of h and shows that if any two such games have the same reduced
strategic form then one can be obtained from the other by a sequence of
the four transformations. We are not aware of any elegant proof of this
result. We simply give an example to illustrate the procedure: starting
with the game at the top of Figure 210.1 the series of transformations
shown in Figures 210.1 and 211.1 leads to the extensive game with per-
fect information and simultaneous moves at the bottom of Figure 211.1.


11.3   Framing Effects and the Equivalence of Extensive
       Games

The principles of equivalence between extensive games discussed in the
previous section are based on a conception of rationality that ignores
framing effects. This conception is inconsistent with the findings of
psychologists that even minor variations in the framing of a problem may
dramatically affect the participants’ behavior (see for example Tversky
and Kahneman (1986)).
   To illustrate that games that are equivalent according to these princi-
ples may differ in their framing and lead to different behavior, consider
the strictly competitive games in Figure 212.1. The middle game is ob-
tained from the top one by adding a superfluous move; the bottom game
is the strategic form of each extensive game.
   A reasonable principle for behavior in these games is that of maxmin-
imizing. However, this principle yields different outcomes in the games.
In the bottom game player 1’s maxminimizer is the pure strategy r while
in the top game the logic of maxminimizing directs her towards using the
mixed strategy ( 12 , 12 ) (since she is informed that chance played right).
   This example was originally proposed as a demonstration of the diffi-
culties with the principle of maxminimizing, but we view it as a part of
a deeper problem: how to analyze game theoretic situations taking into
account framing effects, an intriguing issue of current research.
210                 Chapter 11. Extensive Games with Imperfect Information


                                        1b
                              2 r  HH 2
                                       
                                             HHr
                           r      @r        r      @r1
                                 @               @
                            1        2       3
                          o        o       o
                                                 r     @r
                                                    @
                                                o4      o5
                                          ↓
                              adding a superfluous move

                                  1b
                               HH 2
                                             rHH
                                           HH
                          
                    2 r           prpp p p p 1p p p H  Hr
                                                       p p p
                                                   HH

                 r      @r     r       @r              r      @r
                       @           @                         @
                  1        2    3          3            4
                o        o    o          o            o        o5
                                            ↓
                                   interchanging moves

                                  1b
                               HH 1
                                             rHH
                                           HH
                          
                    2 r           prpp p p p 2p p p H  Hr
                                                       p p p
                                                   HH

                 r      @r     r       @r              r      @r
                       @            @                        @
                  1        2    3          4            3
                o        o    o          o            o        o5
                                           ↓
                               adding a superfluous move

                                                  1b
                                             HH
                                                               r1
                                        
                                                         HH
                                                          H
            prp 
                 p p p p p p p 2p p p p p p p p p rH
                                                                H
                                                                   HH
                                                                           H
        r       @r                    prpp p p p p p p p pHp
                                                            Hpr2p p p p p p p p H
                                                                                p p p
                                                                                   Hr
              @                                      H
       o1         o2
                                r         @r             r        @r            r      @r
                                      @                        @                      @
                                3             4           3          4           3
                              o             o           o          o           o        o5

Figure 210.1 The first three transformations in a series that converts the top
game into an extensive game with perfect information and simultaneous moves. The
transformations continue in Figure 211.1.
11.3 Framing Effects and the Equivalence of Extensive Games                                           211




                                              ↓
                               adding three superfluous moves

                                                   1b
                                             HH
                                                                     r1
                                                            HH
                                                                H HH
                                                                      HH
                  prp 
                       p p p p p p p p p p p p p 2p pr
                                                       p p p p p p p p p p p pHpHpHp r
                                                                           H
                  @                                  @                               @
         pr p p p p p p@p
                        @pr p p p p p p p pr p p p 2p p p@p
                                                          @pr p p p p p p p pr p p p p p p@p
                                                                                          @r
       r @@r           r @  @r         r @  @r           r @  @r         r @ @r           r @@r
      o1 o1 o2 o2 o3 o4 o3 o4 o3 o5 o3 o5
                                                 ↓
                                        inflation–deflation

                                              1b
                                          HH
                                                                r1
                                                       H
                                                         HH
                                                           HH    HH
                     
             prp 
                  p p p p p p p p p p p p p 2p pr
                                                  p p p p p p p p p p p pH
                                                                         pHpHp r
                                                                      H

      pr p p p p @
                 @p p p p p p p p p p2 pr p p p p @
                  p                                @p p p p p p p p p p r
                                                    p
             @                                  @                              @
                                                                                  @@
    r @@r            @              r @  @r            @              r @ @r          @
   o1 o1                 @         o3 o4                   @         o3 o5                @
                            @@pr p p p p p p p p p p p p p p@p @pr2p p p p p p p p p p p p p p@p
                                                                                              @r
                            r @  @r                           r @  @r                        r @ @r
                           o2 o2                             o3 o4                          o 3 o5
                                              ↓
                                 coalescing moves (six times)

                                              1b
                                      XXXX
                                                             XX
             prp 
              P    p p
                      p p p p p p p p p p p   pr2p p p p p p p p p p X
                                             p P                       p pX
                                                                          p pX
                                                                              p rP
       r r @
               @r P
                   P   Pr         r r @
                                               @r PP    Pr         rr @       @Pr P
                                                                                      Pr
        1                  2       3       4         3       4       3       5
      o   o 1
                  o 2
                         o       o       o         o       o       o       o       o3 o5

Figure 211.1 The last three transformations in a series that converts the top game
in Figure 210.1 into the extensive game with perfect information and simultaneous
moves in the bottom of this figure.
  212                   Chapter 11. Extensive Games with Imperfect Information


                                                   cb       1
                                     1        H 2
                                     2                H   HHrH 1
                                                      `H
                                                                  HHrH
                          prp
                              p p p p p p p p p 2p prp p p p p p p p H
                                                                     p p p
                                                                         Hr
                        ` @r                 ` @r                      ` @r
                       r      @r            r          @r             r     @r
                    6, −6     0, 0      2, −2           0, 0        0, 0    2, −2
                                          c
                                     1
                                     2
                                          bXXX 12
                            prp
                                p 
                                  p p p p p p p p p 1p p p p p p p p X
                                                                     p pXp 
                                                                           Xr
                                                                           p
                                               X
                    `HHr                                           ` HHr
               prpp p p p p p p p pHp
                                     Hpr p p p p p 2p p p p p p prpp p p p p p p p pHp
                                                                                      Hr
             ` @r                  ` @r                     ` @r                    ` @r
            r      @r             r        @r              r         @r            r     @r
         6, −6      0, 0       6, −6        0, 0       2, −2         0, 0        0, 0    2, −2

                                               `          r

                                         `   4, −4      0, 0

                                         r   3, −3     1, −1

  Figure 212.1 Three games. The middle game is obtained from the top game by
  adding a superfluous move. The bottom game is the strategic form of both the top
  and middle games.



  11.4     Mixed and Behavioral Strategies

  In Definition 203.1 we defined the notion of a pure strategy in an exten-
  sive game. There are two ways to model the possibility that a player’s
  actions in such a game depend upon random factors.
I Definition 212.1 A mixed strategy of player i in an extensive
  game hN, H, P, fc , (Ii ), (%i )i is a probability measure over the set of
  player i’s pure strategies. A behavioral strategy of player i is a
  collection (βi (Ii ))Ii ∈Ii of independent probability measures, where βi (Ii )
  is a probability measure over A(Ii ).
  For any history h ∈ Ii ∈ Ii and action a ∈ A(h) we denote by βi (h)(a)
  the probability βi (Ii )(a) assigned by βi (Ii ) to the action a.
     Thus, as in a strategic game, a mixed strategy of player i is a probabil-
  ity measure over player i’s set of pure strategies. By contrast, a behav-
  ioral strategy specifies a probability measure over the actions available
  to player i at each of his information sets. The two notions reflect two
  different ways in which a player might randomize: he might randomly
11.4 Mixed and Behavioral Strategies                                                  213



select a pure strategy, or he might plan a collection of randomizations,
one for each of the points at which he has to take an action. The dif-
ference between the two notions can be appreciated by examining the
game in Figure 202.1. In this game player 1 has two information sets,
at each of which she has two possible actions. Thus she has four pure
strategies, which assign to the information sets {∅} and {(L, A), (L, B)}
respectively the actions L and `, L and r, R and `, and R and r. (If you
are puzzled by the last two strategies, read (or reread) Section 6.1.2.) A
mixed strategy of player 1 is a probability distribution over these four
pure strategies. By contrast, a behavioral strategy of player 1 is a pair
of probability distributions, one for each information set; the first is a
distribution over {L, R} and the second is a distribution over {`, r}.
   In describing a mixed or behavioral strategy we have used the language
of the naı̈ve interpretation of actions that depend on random factors,
according to which a player consciously chooses a random device (see
Section 3.2). When discussing mixed strategies in Chapter 3, we describe
some other interpretations, which have analogs here. For example, we
may think of the mixed and behavioral strategies of player i as two
ways of describing the other players’ beliefs about player i’s behavior.
The other players can organize their beliefs in two ways: they can form
conjectures about player i’s pure strategy in the entire game (a mixed
strategy), or they can form a collection of independent beliefs about
player i’s actions for each history after which he has to act (a behavioral
strategy).
   For any profile σ = (σi )i∈N of either mixed or behavioral strategies in
an extensive game, we define the outcome O(σ) of σ to be the probabil-
ity distribution over the terminal histories that results when each player i
follows the precepts of σi . For a finite game this outcome is defined pre-
cisely as follows. For any history h = (a1 , . . . , ak ) define a pure strategy
si of player i to be consistent with h if for every subhistory (a1 , . . . , a` )
of h for which P (a1 , . . . , a` ) = i we have si (a1 , . . . , a` ) = a`+1 . For any
history h let πi (h) be the sum of the probabilities according to σi of
all the pure strategies of player i that are consistent with h. (Thus for
example if h is a history in which player i never moves then πi (h) = 1.)
Then for any profile σ of mixed strategies the probability that O(σ) as-
signs to any terminal history h is Πi∈N ∪{c} πi (h). For any profile β of
behavioral strategies the probability that O(β) assigns to the terminal
                                      K−1
history h = (a1 , . . . , aK ) is Πk=0    βP (a1 ,...,ak ) (a1 , . . . , ak )(ak+1 ) (where
                            1         k
for k = 0 the history (a , . . . , a ) is the initial history).
214                Chapter 11. Extensive Games with Imperfect Information

                                             b
                                        a pp@ b
                                           p
                                       rpp 1 @ @r
                                   a   @b       0
                               r         @@r
                              0              1

Figure 214.1 A one-player extensive game in which there is a behavioral strategy
that is not outcome-equivalent to any mixed strategy.


    Two (mixed or behavioral) strategies of any player are outcome-
equivalent if for every collection of pure strategies of the other players
the two strategies induce the same outcome. In the remainder of this
section we examine the conditions under which for any mixed strategy
there is an outcome-equivalent behavioral strategy and vice versa; we
show, in particular, that this is so in any game with perfect recall.
    We first argue that, in a set of games that includes all those with per-
fect recall, for any behavioral strategy there is an outcome-equivalent
mixed strategy. Consider an extensive game in which no information
set contains both some history h and a history of the form (h, h0 ) for
some h0 6= ∅. (Note that this condition is satisfied by any game with
perfect recall; it is often included as part of the definition of an exten-
sive game.) For every behavioral strategy βi of any player i in such a
game, the mixed strategy defined as follows is outcome-equivalent: the
probability assigned to any pure strategy si (which specifies an action
si (Ii ) for every information set Ii ∈ Ii ) is ΠIi ∈Ii βi (Ii )(si (Ii )). (Note
that the derivation of this mixed strategy relies on the assumption that
the collection (βi (Ii ))Ii ∈Ii is independent. Note also that in a game in
which some information set contains histories of the form h and (h, h0 )
with h0 6= ∅ there may be a behavioral strategy for which there is no
equivalent mixed strategy: in the game in Figure 214.1, for example,
the behavioral strategy that assigns probability p ∈ (0, 1) to a gener-
ates the outcomes (a, a), (a, b), and b with probabilities p2 , p(1 − p), and
1−p respectively, a distribution that cannot be duplicated by any mixed
strategy.)
    We now show that, in a game with perfect recall, for every mixed
strategy there is an outcome-equivalent behavioral strategy.
Proposition 214.1 For any mixed strategy of a player in a finite ex-
tensive game with perfect recall there is an outcome-equivalent behavioral
strategy.
11.4 Mixed and Behavioral Strategies                                          215


                                              1b
                                   L  HH R
                             prp p p p p p p 1p p p p p p H
                                                           p p
                                                            Hr
                                                     H
                        L    @R                          L @R
                      r           @@r                  r       @r
                                                               @
                     o1              o2               o3        o4

Figure 215.1 An extensive game in which mixed and behavioral strategies are not
equivalent.


Proof. Let σi be a mixed strategy of player i. As above, for any history h
let πi (h) be the sum of the probabilities according to σi of all the pure
strategies of player i that are consistent with h. Let h and h0 be two
histories in the same information set Ii of player i, and let a ∈ A(h).
Since the game has perfect recall, the sets of actions of player i in h
and h0 are the same. Thus πi (h) = πi (h0 ). Since in any pure strategy
of player i the action a is taken after h if and only if it is taken after
h0 , we also have πi (h, a) = πi (h0 , a). Thus we can define a behavioral
strategy βi of player i by βi (Ii )(a) = πi (h, a)/πi (h) for any h ∈ Ii for
                            P
which πi (h) > 0 (clearly a∈A(h) βi (Ii )(a) = 1); how we define βi (Ii )(a)
if πi (h) = 0 is immaterial.
    We claim that βi is outcome-equivalent to σi . Let s−i be a collection
of pure strategies for the players other than i. Let h be a terminal
history. If h includes moves that are inconsistent with s−i then the
probability of h is zero under both σi and βi . Now assume that all the
moves of players other than i in h are consistent with s−i . If h includes
a move after a subhistory h0 ∈ Ii of h that is inconsistent with σi then
βi (Ii ) assigns probability zero to this move, and thus the probability of h
according to βi is zero. Finally, if h is consistent with σi then πi (h0 ) > 0
for all subhistories h0 of h and the probability of h according to βi is the
product of πi (h0 , a)/πi (h0 ) over all (h0 , a) that are subhistories of h; this
product is πi (h), the probability of h according to σi .                       2
   In a game with imperfect recall there may be a mixed strategy for
which there is no outcome-equivalent behavioral strategy, as the one-
player game with imperfect recall in Figure 215.1 shows. Consider the
mixed strategy in which player 1 chooses LL with probability 12 and RR
with probability 21 . The outcome of this strategy is the probability dis-
tribution ( 12 , 0, 0, 12 ) over the terminal histories. This outcome cannot be
achieved by any behavioral strategy: the behavioral strategy ((p, 1 − p),
(q, 1 − q)) induces a distribution over the terminal histories in which
 216                 Chapter 11. Extensive Games with Imperfect Information


                                                         1
                                                       bXX
                                      A                  XXXB
                     r                                            Xr
                                                                XXX
                      2  XXX   
             L  
                     M              XXRX
       r               pr p p p p p p p 1p p p p p pXpXp
                                                       Xr
            
                                            X
                    ` @r                             ` @r
                  r          @@r                  r        @r
                                                           @

              Figure 216.1 The extensive game form for Exercise 216.1.


 LR has zero probability only if either p = 0 or q = 1, in which case the
 probability of either LL or RR is zero.
? Exercise 216.1    Consider the game form in Figure 216.1. Find the
 behavioral strategy of player 1 that is equivalent to her mixed strategy
 in which she plays (B, r) with probability 0.4, (B, `) with probability
 0.1, and (A, `) with probability 0.5.

 11.5      Nash Equilibrium

 A Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies of an extensive game is (as
 before) a profile σ ∗ of mixed strategies with the property that for every
 player i ∈ N we have
          ∗
       O(σ−i , σi∗ ) %i O(σ−i
                           ∗
                              , σi ) for every mixed strategy σi of player i.

 For finite games an equivalent definition of a mixed strategy equilib-
 rium is that every pure strategy in the support of each player’s mixed
 strategy is a best response to the strategies of the other players (cf.
 Definition 44.1). A Nash equilibrium in behavioral strategies is
 defined analogously.
    Given Proposition 214.1, the two definitions are equivalent for games
 with perfect recall. For games with imperfect recall they are not equiv-
 alent, as the game in Figure 214.1 shows. In this game the player is
 indifferent among all her mixed strategies, which yield her a payoff of 0,
 while the behavioral strategy that assigns probability p to a yields her
 a payoff of p2 · 0 + p · (1 − p) · 1 + (1 − p) · 0 = p(1 − p), so that the best
 behavioral strategy has p = 21 , and yields her a payoff of 14 .
    In Chapter 6 we argue that the notion of Nash equilibrium is often
 unsatisfactory in extensive games with perfect information and we intro-
 duce the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium to deal with the prob-
 lems. To extend the ideas behind this notion to general extensive games
 Notes                                                                                           217


                                                   1
                                      `        bXX r
                                                           XXX
                         pr
                            Hp p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 
                                                   2                   Xp XrH
                                      
                               
               prpp p p p p p p p pHp
                                     Hpr p p p p p 1p p p p p p prpp p p p p p p p pHp
                                                                                      Hr
                               H                                               H
             ` @r                  ` @r                    ` @r                     ` @r
            r      @r             r       @r              r         @r             r     @r
         1, −1      0, 0        0, 0       0, 0         0, 0         0, 0        0, 0    1, −1

  Figure 217.1 The extensive game with imperfect information in Exercise 217.1.


 is challenging, mainly because when making a choice at a non-singleton
 information set a player has to form an expectation about the history
 that occurred, an expectation that may not be uniquely determined by
 the equilibrium strategies. The next chapter is devoted to a discussion
 of this issue.
? Exercise 217.1    Consider the strictly competitive extensive game with
 imperfect recall in Figure 217.1. Show that player 1’s best behavioral
 strategy assures her a payoff of 1 with probability 41 , while there is a
 mixed strategy that assures her the payoff 1 with probability 12 .
? Exercise 217.2     Let Γ2 be an extensive game with imperfect informa-
 tion in which there are no chance moves, and assume that the game Γ1
 differs from Γ2 only in that one of the information sets of player 1 in Γ2
 is split into two information sets in Γ1 . Show that all Nash equilibria in
 pure strategies of Γ2 correspond to Nash equilibria of Γ1 . Show that the
 requirement that there be no chance moves is essential for this result.
? Exercise 217.3    Formulate the following parlor game as an extensive
 game with imperfect information. First player 1 receives a card that is
 either H or L with equal probabilities. Player 2 does not see the card.
 Player 1 may announce that her card is L, in which case she must pay
 $1 to player 2, or may claim that her card is H, in which case player 2
 may choose to concede or to insist on seeing player 1’s card. If player 2
 concedes then he must pay $1 to player 1. If he insists on seeing player 1’s
 card then player 1 must pay him $4 if her card is L and he must pay
 her $4 if her card is H. Find the Nash equilibria of this game.

 Notes

 The model of an extensive game with imperfect information studied in
 this chapter is due to Kuhn (1950, 1953), as are the notions of perfect and
 imperfect recall. Section 11.2 is based on Thompson (1952); the example
218             Chapter 11. Extensive Games with Imperfect Information



at the end of the section is based on one in Elmes and Reny (1994).
The example in Section 11.3 is based on Aumann and Maschler (1972).
Proposition 214.1 is due to Kuhn (1950, 1953). The game in Figure 214.1
is a variant of one due to Isbell (1957, p. 85).
12          Sequential Equilibrium




In this chapter we extend the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium to
extensive games with imperfect information. We focus on the concept
of sequential equilibrium and briefly discuss some of its refinements.

12.1    Strategies and Beliefs

Recall that a subgame perfect equilibrium of an extensive game with
perfect information is a strategy profile for which every player’s strategy
is optimal (given the other players’ strategies) at any history after which
it is his turn to take an action, whether or not the history occurs if the
players follow their strategies. The natural application of this idea to
extensive games with imperfect information leads to the requirement
that each player’s strategy be optimal at each of his information sets.
   For the game in Figure 219.1 this requirement is substantial. The
pair of strategies (L, R) is a Nash equilibrium of this game. If player 1
adheres to this equilibrium then player 2’s information set is not reached.

                            1b
                           PPP
                  L                    PP R
                       
                            M                  PP
          r                 pr p p p p p p p p 2p p p p p p Pp pPp
                                                                 Pr
                                                       P
           
        2, 2              L @ R                              L @ R
                        r           @r                    r          @r
                                  @                                 @
                      3, 1           0, 0               0, 2         1, 1

Figure 219.1 An extensive game with imperfect information in which the require-
ment that each player’s strategy be optimal at every information set eliminates a
Nash equilibrium.
220                                        Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium


                           1b
                          PPP
                 L                    PP R
                      
                           M                 PP
          r                pr p p p p p p p p p p p p p p P   Pr
                                                            p pPp
                                                     P
                                            2
        2, 2             L @ R                             L @ R
                       r           @r                   r          @r
                                 @                                @
                     3, 1           0, 2              0, 2         1, 1

Figure 220.1 An extensive game with imperfect information that has a Nash equi-
librium that is not ruled out by an implementation of the idea behind the notion of
subgame perfect equilibrium.


However, if for some reason player 2’s information set is reached then
his action R is inferior to his action L whatever he thinks caused him to
have to act (i.e. whether player 1, contrary to her plan, chose M or R).
Thus for this game the natural extension of the idea of subgame perfect
equilibrium is unproblematic: the equilibrium (L, R) does not satisfy the
conditions of this extension (while the equilibrium (M, L) does). The
games for which this is so are rare; a more common situation is that
which arises in the game in Figure 220.1. In this game too the strategy
profile (L, R) is a Nash equilibrium in which player 2’s information set is
not reached. But in this case player 2’s optimal action in the event that
his information set is reached depends on his belief about the history
that has occurred. The action R is optimal if he assigns probability of
at least 12 to the history M , while L is optimal if he assigns probability
of at most 12 to this history. Thus his optimal action depends on his
explanation of the cause of his having to act. His belief cannot be derived
from the equilibrium strategy, since this strategy assigns probability zero
to his information set being reached.
   The solutions for extensive games that we have studied so far have
a single component: a strategy profile. We now study a solution—
sequential equilibrium—that consists of both a strategy profile and a
belief system, where a belief system specifies, for each information set,
the beliefs held by the players who have to move at that information
set about the history that occurred. It is natural to include a belief
system as part of the equilibrium, given our interpretation of the no-
tion of subgame perfect equilibrium (see Section 6.4). When discussing
this notion of equilibrium we argue that to describe fully the players’
reasoning about a game we have to specify their expectations about
the actions that will be taken after histories that will not occur if the
12.1 Strategies and Beliefs                                              221



players adhere to their plans, and that these expectations should be
consistent with rationality. In particular, we interpret the components
of a strategy that specify actions after histories that are not consistent
with the strategy as beliefs about what will happen in these unexpected
events. In games with imperfect information, beliefs about unexpected
events must include beliefs not only about the future but also about
the past.
   To summarize, the basic idea behind the notion of sequential equilib-
rium is that an equilibrium should specify not only the players’ strategies
but also their beliefs at each information set about the history that oc-
curred. We refer to such a pair as an assessment. That is, an assessment
consists of (i ) a profile of behavioral strategies and (ii ) a belief system
consisting of a collection of probability measures, one for each informa-
tion set. (Note that the notion of an assessment coincides with that of a
strategy profile for an extensive game with perfect information since in
such a game all information sets are singletons and hence there is only
one possible (degenerate) belief system.)
   The extension of the requirement in a subgame perfect equilibrium
that each player’s strategy be optimal after any history is the following,
which we refer to as sequential rationality: for each information set of
each player i the (behavioral) strategy of player i is a best response to
the other players’ strategies, given player i’s beliefs at that information
set.
   So far we have imposed no restriction on the players’ beliefs. Several
classes of additional constraints are discussed in the literature, including
the following.
 Consistency with Strategies In the spirit of Nash equilibrium we should
require that the belief system be consistent with the strategy profile, in
the sense that at any information set consistent with the players’ strate-
gies the belief about the history that has occurred should be derived
from the strategies using Bayes’ rule. For example in the game in Fig-
ure 220.1 we do not want (M, L) to be a solution supported by the
belief of player 2 that the history that led to his information set is R. If
player 1’s strategy is consistent with her choosing either M or R (that is,
her strategy assigns positive probability to at least one of these choices),
then we want to require that player 2’s belief that the history M has
occurred be derived from player 1’s strategy using Bayes’ rule. That is,
player 2 should assign probability β1 (∅)(M )/(β1 (∅)(M ) + β1 (∅)(R))
(where β1 is player 1’s behavioral strategy) to this event.
  222                                    Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium



   Structural Consistency Even at an information set that is not reached
  if all players adhere to their strategies we may wish to require that a
  player’s belief be derived from some (alternative) strategy profile using
  Bayes’ rule. (This constraint on the beliefs is referred to as “structural”
  since it does not depend on the players’ payoffs or on the equilibrium
  strategy.)
    Common Beliefs Game theoretic solution concepts require that all
  asymmetries be included in the description of the game; every player
  is assumed to analyze the situation in the same way. In the context
  of subgame perfect equilibrium this leads to the (implicit) requirement
  that all the players’ beliefs about the plans of some player i in case an
  unexpected event occurs are the same. In the current context it leads to
  the requirement that all players share the same belief about the cause
  of any unexpected event.

     For some families of games the formal expression of these three restric-
  tions is not problematic, though the reasonableness of the restrictions is
  in dispute. One example is the family of games in which the first move,
  about which the players may be asymmetrically informed, is made by
  chance, and subsequently every player is informed of every other player’s
  moves. However, for arbitrary games even the formalization of the re-
  strictions presents difficulties, as we shall see. The most widely-used
  formulation is that of sequential equilibrium, which we define in the
  next section. This notion usually leaves many degrees of freedom and
  is frequently consistent with a large set of outcomes, a fact that has
  motivated game theorists to impose additional restrictions on beliefs. In
  later sections we briefly discuss some of these restrictions.


  12.2   Sequential Equilibrium

  We restrict attention throughout to games with perfect recall (see Defi-
  nition 203.3) in which every information set contains a finite number of
  histories. As we discuss above, a candidate for a sequential equilibrium
  of such a game is an assessment, defined formally as follows.
I Definition 222.1 An assessment in an extensive game is a pair (β, µ),
  where β is a profile of behavioral strategies and µ is a function that
  assigns to every information set a probability measure on the set of
  histories in the information set.
 12.2 Sequential Equilibrium                                                          223



    Let (β, µ) be an assessment in Γ = hN, H, P, fc , (Ii ), (%i )i. The inter-
 pretation of µ, which we refer to as a belief system, is that µ(I)(h) is
 the probability that player P (I) assigns to the history h ∈ I, conditional
 on I being reached.
    An assessment is sequentially rational if for every player i and every
 information set Ii ∈ Ii the strategy of player i is a best response to the
 other players’ strategies given i’s beliefs at Ii . To state this condition
 more formally, define the outcome O(β, µ|I) of (β, µ) conditional on
 I to be the distribution over terminal histories determined by β and µ
 conditional on I being reached, as follows. Let h∗ = (a1 , . . . , aK ) be a
 terminal history and let h = (a1 , . . . , aL ) ∈ I for some L < K. Then
    •   O(β, µ|I)(h∗ ) = 0 if there is no subhistory of h∗ in I (i.e. the
        information that the game has reached I rules out h∗ ).
                                    K−1
    •   O(β, µ|I)(h∗ ) = µ(I)(h) · Πk=L βP (a1 ,...,ak ) (a1 , . . . , ak )(ak+1 ).
 (If I is the information set consisting of the initial history then O(β, µ|I)
 is just the outcome O(β) defined in Section 11.4.) To appreciate the role
 of the assumption of perfect recall, note that this assumption implies
 that there is at most one subhistory of h∗ in I. Note also that the
 rationale for taking the product in the second case is that by perfect
 recall the histories (a1 , . . . , ak ) for k = L, . . . , K − 1 lie in different
 information sets, and thus for k = L, . . . , K − 1 the events {ak+1 follows
 (a1 , . . . , ak ) conditional on (a1 , . . . , ak ) occurring} are independent.
    While at first sight this definition of O(β, µ|I) is natural, it has un-
 desirable features in a game in which there are two information sets I
 and I 0 and histories h ∈ I and h0 ∈ I 0 with the property that a subhis-
 tory of h is in I 0 and a subhistory of h0 is in I. The following example
 demonstrates this point.
 Example 223.1 Consider the game form shown in Figure 224.1. (Some-
  times, as here, we represent the initial history by several small circles
  rather than a single circle. In this example the number adjacent to each
  such circle is the probability assigned by chance to one of its actions at
  the initial history.) In an assessment (β, µ) in which β1 = β3 = Out
  player 2’s information set is not reached; if he is called upon to move
  then an unexpected event must have occurred. Suppose that his belief
  at his information set, I, satisfies µ(I)(A, C) > 0 and µ(I)(B, C) > 0.
  In deciding the action to take in the event that I is reached, he must cal-
  culate O(β, µ|I). The definition of this distribution given above assumes
  224                                                Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium

                                       r         r         r
                                       Out       Out       Out
                           1 b          r        r          r    r
                           2            p C      p C       p C
                                 A      p        p         p
                                        p1       p2        p3
                                        p C      p C       p B
                             r C       pr        pr        pr    b1
                                                                     2
                                 Out       Out       Out
                                       r         r         r

  Figure 224.1 The game form in Example 223.1. (The game begins with a move of
  chance in which A and B are each selected with probability 12 .)


  that he continues to hold expectations about the moves of players 1 and
  3 that are derived from β. However, any strategy profile that generates
  the belief µ(I) must differ from β: it must assign positive probability to
  both player 1 and player 3 choosing C. That is, if his belief is derived
  from an alternative strategy profile, then his explanation of the past is
  inconsistent with his expectation of the future.
     This example illustrates the complexity of defining a reasonable ex-
  tension of the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium for games in which
  one information set can occur both before and after another. The defi-
  nition of sequential equilibrium that we now present covers such games
  but, as the example indicates, can lack appeal in them. We begin with
  a formal definition of sequential rationality.
I Definition 224.1 Let Γ = hN, H, P, fc , (Ii ), (%i )i be an extensive
  game with perfect recall. The assessment (β, µ) is sequentially ra-
  tional if for every player i ∈ N and every information set Ii ∈ Ii we
  have

        O(β, µ|Ii ) %i O((β−i , βi0 ), µ|Ii ) for every strategy βi0 of player i.

    The following definition aims to capture some of the restrictions on
  beliefs discussed in the previous section. Define a behavioral strategy
  profile to be completely mixed if it assigns positive probability to every
  action at every information set.
I Definition 224.2 Let Γ = hN, H, P, fc , (Ii ), (%i )i be a finite extensive
  game with perfect recall. An assessment (β, µ) is consistent if there
  is a sequence ((β n , µn ))∞
                             n=1 of assessments that converges to (β, µ) in
  Euclidian space and has the properties that each strategy profile β n is
  completely mixed and that each belief system µn is derived from β n
  using Bayes’ rule.
  12.2 Sequential Equilibrium                                                       225


                          1b            C               2r       c       r1, 1, 1
                            D                                d
                          pr p p p p p p p 3p p p p p p p p r
                      L   @R                          L @R
                    r          @@r                  r          @r
                                                               @
                3, 3, 2        0, 0, 0          4, 4, 0        0, 0, 1

            Figure 225.1 The game in Example 225.2 (Selten’s horse).


     The idea behind this requirement is that the probability of events
  conditional on zero-probability events must approximate probabilities
  that are derived from strategies that assign positive probability to ev-
  ery action. We do not find this consistency requirement to be natural,
  since it is stated in terms of limits; it appears to be a rather opaque
  technical assumption. To quote Kreps (1990a, p. 430), “[r]ather a lot
  of bodies are buried in this definition”. The assumptions embodied in
  the definition are unclear to us, though we shall see that the definition
  does capture some appealing requirements that we may wish to impose
  on assessments.
I Definition 225.1 An assessment is a sequential equilibrium of a
  finite extensive game with perfect recall if it is sequentially rational and
  consistent.
     We show later (Proposition 249.1) that every finite extensive game
  with perfect recall has a sequential equilibrium. It is clear that if (β, µ) is
  a sequential equilibrium then β is a Nash equilibrium. Further, in an ex-
  tensive game with perfect information (β, µ) is a sequential equilibrium
  if and only if β is a subgame perfect equilibrium.
     Consider again the game in Figure 220.1. The assessment (β, µ) in
  which β1 (L) = 1, β2 (R) = 1, and µ({M, R})(M ) = α for any α ∈ [0, 1]
  is consistent since it is the limit as  → 0 of assessments (β  , µ ) where
  β1 = (1 − , α, (1 − α)), β2 = (, 1 − ), and µ ({M, R})(M ) = α for
  every . For α ≥ 21 this assessment is also sequentially rational, so that
  it is a sequential equilibrium.
 Example 225.2 (Selten’s horse) The game in Figure 225.1 has two types
  of Nash equilibria: one in which β1 (∅)(D) = 1, 31 ≤ β2 (C)(c) ≤ 1, and
  β3 (I)(L) = 1, and one in which β1 (∅)(C) = 1, β2 (C)(c) = 1, and
  3
  4 ≤ β3 (I)(R) ≤ 1 (where I = {(D), (C, d)}, player 3’s information
  set). A Nash equilibrium of the first type is not part of any sequential
 226                                       Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium


                             1b
                            PPP
                   L                    PP R
                        
                             M                 PP
            r                pr p p p p p p p p p p p p p p P   Pr
                                                              p pPp
                                                       P
                                              2
          1, 1             L @ R                             L @ R
                         r           @r                   r          @r
                                   @                                @
                       3, 1         −2, 0               2, 0        −1, 1

                    Figure 226.1 The game in Exercise 226.1.


 equilibrium since the associated assessment violates sequential rational-
 ity at player 2’s (singleton) information set. For every Nash equilibrium
 β of the second type there is a sequential equilibrium (β, µ) in which
 µ(I)(D) = 13 . (To verify consistency, consider the sequence (β  ) of
 strategy profiles in which β1 (∅)(C) = 1 − , β2 (C)(c) = 2/(1 − ), and
 β3 (I)(R) = β3 (I)(R) − .)
? Exercise 226.1      Find the set of sequential equilibria of the game in
 Figure 226.1.
    The following example shows that the notion of sequential equilibrium
 is not invariant to the principle of coalescing of moves considered in
 Section 11.2, a principle that seems very reasonable.
 Example 226.2 Consider the games in Figure 227.1. The top game
  (Γ1 ) is obtained from the bottom one (Γ2 ) by coalescing the moves
  of player 1. In Γ1 the assessment (β, µ) in which β1 = L, β2 = L,
  and µ({M, R})(R) = 0 is a sequential equilibrium. (To verify consis-
  tency, consider the sequence (β  ) in which β1 (∅) = (1 −  − 2 , , 2 )
  and β2 ({M, R}) = (1 − , ).) This equilibrium yields the payoff profile
  (3, 3). On the other hand, in any sequential equilibrium of Γ2 player 1’s
  action at her second information set is R, by sequential rationality (since
  R dominates L). Thus in any consistent assessment player 2’s belief
  µ({(C, L), (C, R)}) assigns probability 1 to (C, R), so that player 2 must
  choose R. Hence β1 = (C, R) is the only equilibrium strategy of player 1.
  Thus the only sequential equilibrium payoff profile in Γ2 is (5, 1).
    The significant difference between the two games is that player 2’s
  belief in Γ2 is based on the assumption that the relative likelihood of
  the actions L and R at player 1’s second information set is the outcome
  of a rational choice by player 1, whereas player 2’s belief in Γ1 about
  the relative probabilities of M and R is not constrained by any choice
  of player 1. We argued in Section 6.4 that in some games a player’s
  12.2 Sequential Equilibrium                                                   227


                             1b
                            PPP
                   L                    PP R
                        
                             M                 PP
            r                pr p p p p p p p p p p p p p p P   Pr
                                                              p pPp
                                                       P
                                              2
          3, 3             L @ R                             L @ R
                         r           @r                   r          @r
                                   @                                @
                       0, 1           0, 0              1, 0         5, 1

                            1b
                           PPPC
                  S 
                                        PPr1
                                  LPPPR
            r               prp p p p p p p p 2p p p p p p P   Pr
                                                              p pPp
                
                             
          3, 3            L    @   R                         L @ R
                        r           @r                    r          @r
                                  @                                 @
                      0, 1           0, 0               1, 0         5, 1

  Figure 227.1 Two similar games. The top game (Γ1 ) is obtained from the bottom
  game (Γ2 ) by coalescing the moves of player 1.


  strategy is not only a plan of action but also a specification of the other
  players’ beliefs about his actions in the event that he does not follow
  this plan. In Γ2 player 1’s strategy has this role—it specifies player 2’s
  belief about the relative probabilities of player 1 choosing L and R when
  she begins by choosing C—while in Γ1 player 1’s strategy describes only
  her move, without giving any relative probabilities to the other choices.
    The following exercise gives an extension of the one deviation prop-
  erty for subgame perfect equilibria of extensive games with perfect in-
  formation (Lemma 98.2) to sequential equilibria of extensive games with
  imperfect information.
? Exercise 227.1 (The one deviation property for sequential equilibrium)
  Let (β, µ) be a consistent assessment in a finite extensive game with per-
  fect recall and let βi0 be a strategy of player i; denote β 0 = (β−i , βi0 ). Show
  that if Ii and Ii0 are information sets of player i with the property that
  Ii0 contains histories that have subhistories in Ii then O(β 0 , µ|Ii )(h) =
  O(β 0 , µ|Ii0 )(h) · Pr(β 0 , µ|Ii )(Ii0 ) for any terminal history h that has a
  subhistory in Ii0 , where Pr(β 0 , µ|Ii )(Ii0 ) is the probability (according to
  (β 0 , µ)) that Ii0 is reached given that Ii is reached. Use this fact to show
  that (β, µ) is sequentially rational if and only if no player i has an infor-
  mation set Ii at which a change in βi (Ii ) (holding the remainder of βi
  fixed) increases his expected payoff conditional on reaching Ii .
  228                                                   Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium


                                                              1
                                                           bXXX
                                           L                          XR
                               p
                               r p  p p  p p p p p  p p p p p 2p p p p p p p p p pXp X
                                                                                     p pX
                                                                                        p r
                                                                            X
                               
                     L       H   HR                                             L HH R
                prp 
                     p p p p p p p p pH  p p p
                                             Hpr3p p p p p p p p p p p p p r              HHr
            L @R                         L @R                          L @R                  3, 3, 1
           r         @r                 r          @r                 r          @r
        0, 0, 0     0, 0, 0        4, 1, 1         1, 1, 2        1, 1, 2       1, 4, 1

  Figure 228.1 An extensive game in which there is a sequential equilibrium for which
  the belief system is not structurally consistent.


     In Section 12.1 we discuss three conditions that relate the beliefs and
  strategies in an assessment. One of these is structural consistency, which
  may be defined formally as follows.
I Definition 228.1 The belief system µ in an extensive game with per-
  fect recall is structurally consistent if for each information set I there
  is a strategy profile β with the properties that I is reached with positive
  probability under β and µ(I) is derived from β using Bayes’ rule.
  (Note that different strategy profiles may justify the beliefs at different
  information sets.)
     In many games, for any assessment (β, µ) that is consistent (in the
  sense of Definition 224.2) the belief system µ is structurally consistent.
  However, the following example shows that in some games there are
  consistent assessments (β, µ) (in fact, even sequential equilibria) in which
  µ is not structurally consistent: the beliefs cannot be derived from any
  alternative strategy profile.
 Example 228.2 The game in Figure 228.1 has a unique Nash equilib-
  rium outcome, in which players 1 and 2 choose R. To see this, suppose
  to the contrary that player 3’s information set is reached with positive
  probability. Let the strategy profile used be β and let βi (Ii )(R) = αi for
  i = 1, 2, 3, where Ii is the single information set of player i.
   a. If α3 ≤ 21 then L yields player 2 a payoff of α1 (1 + 3α3 ) ≤ 52 α1 <
      1 + 2α1 , his payoff to R. Thus player 2 chooses R. But then
      µ(I3 )((L, R)) = 1 and hence player 3 chooses R with probability
      1, contradicting α3 ≤ 12 .
   b. If α3 ≥ 12 then L yields player 1 a payoff of α2 (4 − 3α3 ) ≤ 25 α2 <
      1 + 2α2 , her payoff to R. Thus player 1 chooses R. Now if player 2
      chooses L with positive probability then µ(I3 )((R, L)) = 1, and hence
      player 3 chooses L with probability 1, contradicting α3 ≥ 12 . Thus
 12.2 Sequential Equilibrium                                                          229


                     2, 3,
                         r2        3, 1,
                                       r2        3, 3,
                                                    r2        2, 2,
                                                                  r2
                                      @
                           s                                    s
          1 b
                                         `
                                         @       r
                        r                  @r                       r      r0, 0, 2
          2              p                   p                      p e
                 a       p       c           p          d           p
                         p1                  p2                     p3
                         p                   p                      p
     2, 0, 0 r          pr                  pr                      r      b1
                                                                            2
                 c               d       `   @ r        e              b
                          s                     @               s
                         r             r          @r              r
                     2, 2, 2       2, 3, 3       2, 1, 3      2, 3, 2

                         Figure 229.1 The game in Exercise 229.1.


     player 2 chooses R with probability 1, contradicting our assumption
     that player 3’s information set is reached with positive probability.
    Thus in any Nash equilibrium α1 = α2 = 1; in addition we need
 α3 ∈ [ 13 , 23 ], otherwise either player 1 or player 2 can profitably deviate.
 Let β be such an equilibrium. For an assessment (β, µ) to be sequentially
 rational, player 3’s belief µ(I3 ) must assign equal probabilities to the
 histories (L, R) and (R, L), and thus must take the form (1−2γ, γ, γ); an
 assessment in which µ(I3 ) takes this form is consistent if and only if γ =
 1
 2 . (A sequence of strategy profiles that demonstrates consistency for γ =
 1                                                           
 2 is (β ) in which β1 (I1 )(R) = β2 (I2 )(R) = 1 −  and β3 (I3 )(R) = α3 .)
                               1 1
 However, the belief (0, 2 , 2 ) of player 3 violates structural consistency
 since any strategy profile that yields (L, L) with probability zero also
 yields either (L, R) or (R, L) with probability zero.
? Exercise 229.1    Consider the game in Figure 229.1. As in the game in
 Figure 224.1 the first move is made by chance, and the information sets
 are not ordered (player 1’s information set comes either before or after
 player 3’s information set, depending on the move of chance). Show
 that the game has three sequential equilibria in pure strategies, in one
 of which players 1 and 3 both choose S. Discuss the reasonableness of
 these sequential equilibria.
    The next example further illustrates the relationship between consis-
 tency and structural consistency. It shows that a sequentially rational
 assessment (β, µ) in which µ is structurally consistent may not be con-
 sistent (and hence may not be a sequential equilibrium).
 Example 229.2 In the game in Figure 230.1 the assessment (β, µ) in
  which β is the pure strategy profile (R, S, R), player 2’s belief assigns
  probability 1 to the history R, and player 3’s belief assigns probability 1
 230                                             Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium


                                                1b
                                     L  HH R
               0, 0, 0 r       prp p p p p p p 2p p p p p p H
                                                             p p
                                                              Hr       r1, 1, 2
                                                        H
                                 
                           S                                       S
                                 C                            C
                               pr p p p p p p p 3p p p p p p p p r
                           L    @R                         L @R
                         r          @@r                  r         @r
                                                                   @
                     0, 0, 0        0, 0, 1          1, 2, 1       1, 0, 0

 Figure 230.1 An extensive game in which there is a sequentially rational assessment
 with structurally consistent beliefs that is not a sequential equilibrium.


 to the history (L, C), is sequentially rational. Further, the belief µ is
 structurally consistent: in particular, player 3’s belief is supported by
 the alternative pure strategy profile in which player 1 chooses L and
 player 2 chooses C. That is, if player 3 has to move then she believes
 that player 1, as well as player 2, deviated from her equilibrium strategy.
 To rationalize her having to move it is sufficient for her to believe that
 player 2 deviated, and in fact she knows that he did so. Thus structural
 consistency allows player 3 to revise her belief about player 1 even though
 the only evidence she has is that player 2 deviated, and this is enough
 to explain what has happened.
    These structurally consistent beliefs are not consistent: every sequence
 of assessments that involves strategies that are completely mixed and
 converge to β generates beliefs of player 3 that converge to the belief that
 assigns probability 1 to the history (R, C) (while µ assigns probability 1
 to (L, C)). Thus (β, µ) is not a sequential equilibrium. (In the only
 sequential equilibrium of the game the strategy profile is (R, C, L), the
 belief of player 2 assigns probability 1 to R, and the belief of player 3
 assigns probability 1 to (R, C).)
   The next example illustrates how subtle the consistency requirement
 can be.
 Example 230.1 Consider a two-stage three-player game in which in the
  first stage players 1 and 2 simultaneously choose from the set {L, M, R},
  and in the second stage player 3 finds out how many players chose R and
  how many chose L. In this game player 3 has six information sets (for
  example {(M, M )}—the case in which she is informed that two players
  chose M —and {(R, L), (L, R)}—the case in which she is informed that
  one player chose R and one chose L).
  12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium             231



      If the strategies of players 1 and 2 call for them to choose the same
  action, but if in fact they choose different actions, then player 3 has to
  form a belief about the action chosen by each of them. At first sight it
  may seem that the notion of sequential equilibrium does not constrain
  these beliefs. Consider for example an assessment (β, µ) in which all
  three beliefs µ({(M, L), (L, M )})(M, L), µ({(L, R), (R, L)})(L, R), and
  µ({(M, R), (R, M )})(R, M ) are equal to 23 . These beliefs are clearly
  structurally consistent (recall that a different strategy profile can sup-
  port the belief at each information set). However, the fact that consis-
  tency requires the belief at each information set to be justified by the
  same sequence of strategy profiles implies that (β, µ) is not consistent,
  as the following argument shows.
      For (β, µ) to be consistent there must be a sequence (β  ) for which
  the limits of β1 (M )β2 (L)/β1 (L)β2 (M ), β1 (L)β2 (R)/β1 (R)β2 (L), and
  β1 (R)β2 (M )/β1 (M )β2 (R) as  → 0 are all 2 (where βi (a) is an ab-
  breviation for βi (∅)(a)). But the product of these three ratios is 1, in-
  dependent of , while the product of their limits is 8. Thus consistency
  rules out the belief system µ (regardless of β).

  12.3    Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian
          Equilibrium

  We now examine a family of games in which we can define a notion
  of equilibrium that is closely related to sequential equilibrium but is
  simpler. A Bayesian extensive game with observable actions models
  a situation in which every player observes the action of every other
  player; the only uncertainty is about an initial move of chance that
  distributes payoff-relevant personal information among the players in
  such a way that the information received by each player does not reveal
  any information about any of the other players. We say that chance
  selects types for the players and refer to player i after he receives the
  information θi as type θi . The formal definition follows.
I Definition 231.1 A Bayesian extensive game with observable
  actions is a tuple hΓ, (Θi ), (pi ), (ui )i where
   •   Γ = hN, H, P i is an extensive game form with perfect information
       and simultaneous moves
  and for each player i ∈ N
   •   Θi is a finite set (the set of possible types of player i); we write
       Θ = ×i∈N Θi
  232                                         Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium


    •   pi is a probability measure on Θi for which pi (θi ) > 0 for all θi ∈ Θi ,
        and the measures pi are stochastically independent (pi (θi ) is the
        probability that player i is selected to be of type θi )
    •   ui : Θ × Z → R is a von Neumann–Morgenstern utility function
        (ui (θ, h) is player i’s payoff when the profile of types is θ and the
        terminal history of Γ is h).
     The situation that such a game models is one in which chance selects
  the types of the players, who are subsequently fully cognizant at all
  points of all moves taken previously. We can associate with any such
  game an extensive game (with imperfect information and simultaneous
  moves) in which the set of histories is {∅}∪(Θ×H) and each information
                                                                  0         0
  set of each player i takes the form I(θi , h) = {((θi , θ−i       ), h): θ−i ∈ Θ−i }
  for i ∈ P (h) and θi ∈ Θi (so that the number of histories in I(θi , h) is
  the number of members of Θ−i ).
     A candidate for an equilibrium of such a game is a pair ((σi ), (µi )) =
  ((σi (θi ))i∈N,θi ∈Θi , (µi (h))i∈N,h∈H\Z ), where each σi (θi ) is a behavioral
  strategy of player i in Γ (the strategy used by type θi of player i) and
  each µi (h) is a probability measure on Θi (the common belief, after
  the history h, of all players other than i about player i’s type). Such
  a pair is closely related to an assessment. The profile (σi ) rephrases
  the information in a profile of behavioral strategies in the associated
  extensive game; the profile (µi ) summarizes the players’ beliefs and is
  tailored to the assumption that each player is perfectly informed about
  the other players’ previous moves and may be uncertain only about the
  other players’ types.
     Let s be a profile of behavioral strategies in Γ. Define Oh (s) to be
  the probability measure on the set of terminal histories of Γ generated
  by s given that the history h has occurred (see Section 6.2). Define
  O(σ−i , si , µ−i |h) to be the probability measure on the set of terminal
  histories of Γ given that player i uses the strategy si in Γ, each type θj
  of each player j uses the strategy σj (θj ), the game has reached h, and
  the probability that i assigns to θ−i is derived from µ−i (h). That is,
  O(σ−i , si , µ−i |h) is the compound lottery in which the probability of the
  lottery Oh ((σj (θj ))j∈N \{i} , si ) is Πj∈N \{i} µj (h)(θj ) for each θ−i ∈ Θ−i .
     The solution concept that we define is the following.
I Definition 232.1 Let hΓ, (Θi ), (pi ), (ui )i be a Bayesian extensive game
  with observable actions, where Γ = hN, H, P i. A pair ((σi ), (µi )) =
  ((σi (θi ))i∈N,θi ∈Θi , (µi (h))i∈N,h∈H\Z ), where σi (θi ) is a behavioral strat-
  egy of player i in Γ and µi (h) is a probability measure on Θi , is a
12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium             233



perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the game if the following conditions
are satisfied.
Sequential rationality For every nonterminal history h ∈ H \ Z, ev-
   ery player i ∈ P (h), and every θi ∈ Θi the probability measure
   O(σ−i , σi (θi ), µ−i |h) is at least good for type θi as O(σ−i , si , µ−i |h)
   for any strategy si of player i in Γ.
Correct initial beliefs µi (∅) = pi for each i ∈ N .
Action-determined beliefs If i ∈ / P (h) and a ∈ A(h) then µi (h, a) =
   µi (h); if i ∈ P (h), a ∈ A(h), a0 ∈ A(h), and ai = a0i then µi (h, a) =
   µi (h, a0 ).
Bayesian updating If i ∈ P (h) and ai is in the support of σi (θi )(h) for
   some θi in the support of µi (h) then for any θi0 ∈ Θi we have
                                     σi (θi0 )(h)(ai ) · µi (h)(θi0 )
                µi (h, a)(θi0 ) = P                                      .
                                   θi ∈Θi σi (θi )(h)(ai ) · µi (h)(θi )

   The conditions in this definition are easy to interpret. The first re-
quires that the strategy σi (θi ) of each type θi of each player i be optimal
for type θi after every sequence of events. The second requires that ini-
tially the other players’ beliefs about the type of each player i be given
by pi .
   The condition of action-determined beliefs requires that only a player’s
actions influence the other players’ beliefs about his type: (i ) if player i
does not have to move at the history h then the actions taken at h
do not affect the other players’ beliefs about player i’s type and (ii ) if
player i is one of the players who takes an action at h then the other
players’ beliefs about player i’s type depend only on h and the action
taken by player i, not on the other players’ actions. This condition
excludes the possibility that, for example, player j’s updating of his
belief about player i is affected by a move made by some player k 6= i.
Thus the condition is consonant with the general approach that assumes
independence between the players’ strategies.
   The condition of Bayesian updating relates to a case in which player i’s
action at the history h is consistent with the other players’ beliefs about
player i at h, given σi . In such a case the condition requires not only
that the new belief depend only on player i’s action (as required by the
condition of action-determined beliefs) but also that the players’ beliefs
be derived via Bayes’ rule from their observation of player i’s actions.
Thus the players update their beliefs about player i using Bayes’ rule
until his behavior contradicts his strategy σi , at which point they form a
 234                                      Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium



 new conjecture about player i’s type that is the basis for future Bayesian
 updating until there is another conflict with σ.
    We now show that every sequential equilibrium of the extensive game
 associated with a finite Bayesian extensive game with observable actions
 is equivalent to a perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the Bayesian extensive
 game, in the sense that it induces the same behavior and beliefs.
 Proposition 234.1 Let (β, µ) be a sequential equilibrium of the exten-
 sive game associated with the finite Bayesian extensive game with observ-
 able actions hhN, H, P i, (Θi ), (pi ), (ui )i. For every h ∈ H, i ∈ P (h),
 and θi ∈ Θi , let σi (θi )(h) = βi (I(θi , h)). Then there is a collection
 (µi (h))i∈N,h∈H , where µi (h) is a probability measure on Θi , such that

       µ(I(θi , h))(θ, h) = Πj∈N \{i} µj (h)(θj ) for all θ ∈ Θ and h ∈ H

 and ((σi ), (µi )) is a perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the Bayesian exten-
 sive game.
? Exercise 234.2    Prove the proposition. (The main difficulty is to con-
 firm that the beliefs in the sequential equilibrium can be reproduced by
 a collection of common independent beliefs about the players’ types.)
    The concept of perfect Bayesian equilibrium is easier to work with
 than that of sequential equilibrium (since there is no need to mess with
 consistency) but applies to a significantly smaller set of situations. The
 following example shows that even in this restricted domain the two
 notions are not equivalent.
 Example 234.3 Consider a Bayesian extensive game with observable
  actions with the structure given in Figure 235.1. Player 1 has three
  equally likely possible types, x, y, and z, and player 2 has a single
  type. Consider a perfect Bayesian equilibrium ((σi ), (µi )) in which
  σ1 (x) = (Out, L), σ1 (y) = (Out, M ), σ1 (z) = (C, R), µ1 (C, L)(y) = 1,
  µ1 (C, M )(x) = 1, and µ1 (C, R)(z) = 1. That is, player 2 believes that
  player 1 is certainly of type y if he observes the history (C, L), certainly
  of type x if he observes the history (C, M ), and certainly of type z if he
  observes the history (C, R) (the only history that is consistent with σ1 ).
     We claim that ((σi ), (µi )) may (depending on the payoffs) be a per-
  fect Bayesian equilibrium of such a game, since it satisfies the condi-
  tions of action-determined beliefs and Bayesian updating. (Note that
  µ1 (C, L) and µ1 (C, M ) are not constrained by the condition of Bayesian
  updating since the probabilities of the histories (C, L) and (C, M ) are
  both zero, given σ1 .) However, the associated assessment (β, µ) is not
12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium                                                  235


                                    cb
                                  PPP
                            x      y    z
                                         PP
                                          PP
                    1 r
                       - r
                                  1r - r      Pr1
                                               P                                                    r
                         Out                              Out                               Out
                   C                                    C                                  C?
                         r
                         1                                 r
                                                           1                                  r1
                L
                 J                               LJ                               LJ
        [0] prp p p p p p p p p 2p p p p p prp p p p p p p p p p p p p p r
                                          [1]                               [0]
                   M J                                 M J                                M J
      r       @r
              @
                              J R r
                                                 @@r ? J                   r @       @r
                                                                     R                            J R
                    [1] pr p p p Jp p p p p p p p p p 2p pr[0]
                                                             p p p Jp p p p p p p p p p[0]p r       ^
                                                                                                    JJ
                  r @      @r                         r @    @r                          r @    @r
                                    J                                 J                                J
                                      J                                 J                                J
                                        J pr[0]p p p p p p p p p2 p p p p pJ pr[0]p p p p p p p p p p p p p pJ r[1]
                                      r @    @r                         r @     @r                       r @     @r

Figure 235.1 The structure of the Bayesian extensive games with observable actions
in Example 234.3. Such a game may have a perfect Bayesian equilibrium (in which
player 1’s actions are those indicated by the arrows and player 2’s beliefs are indicated
by [1]’s and [0]’s) that is not a sequential equilibrium of the associated extensive game.


consistent, and hence is not a sequential equilibrium of any associated
extensive game, whatever the payoffs. To see this, let (β n , µn ) be a
sequence of assessments that converges to (β, µ), with the properties
that each β n assigns positive probability to each choice at every infor-
mation set and each µn is derived from β n using Bayes’ rule. Denote
by cnθ the probability, according to β1n , that player 1 chooses C after
the history θ, and denote by `nθ and mnθ the probabilities, according to
β1n , that she chooses L and M respectively after the history (θ, C). Let
I2K = {(x, C, K), (y, C, K), (z, C, K)} for K = L, M , R, be the informa-
tion set of player 2 that is reached if player 1 chooses C and then K.
Then by Bayes’ rule we have µn (I2L )(y, C, L) = cny `ny /(cnx `nx +cny `ny +cnz `nz )
(using the fact that the three types of player 1 are equally likely),
which converges (by assumption) to µ(I2L )(y, C, L) = 1. Since `ny →
β1 (y, C)(L) = 0 and `nx → β1 (x, C)(L) = 1 we conclude, dividing the
numerator and denominator of µn (I2L )(y, C, L) by cny , that cnx /cny → 0.
Performing a similar calculation for the belief at I2M , we reach the
contradictory conclusion that cny /cnx → 0. Thus (β, µ) is not consistent.
   This example reflects the fact that the notion of sequential equilibrium
requires that the beliefs of player 2 at two information sets not reached
in the equilibrium not be independent: they must be derived from the
same sequence of perturbed strategies of player 1. The notion of perfect
Bayesian equilibrium imposes no such restriction on beliefs.
 236                                                    Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium


                                              cb
                                           `   @r
                                        1 r 21 12 @
                                                  @r1
                           2, 2 r                                  r0, 0
                                    X                          X
                                          C              C
                           0, 0 r        pr p p p 2p p p p r       r1, 0
                                                    1
                                    X           I              X
                                          C              C
                           0, 0 r        r1              1r        r5, 5
                                    X                          X
                                          C              C
                           0, 0 r        pr p p p 2p p p p r       r1, 1
                                                    2
                                    X           I              X
                                          C              C
                                        r                  r
                                    10, −10              2, 2

 Figure 236.1 The extensive game discussed in Example 236.1. In all sequential
 equilibria of this game player 2 believes at his first information set that chance chose
 r with certainty, but believes at his second information set that there is a positive
 probability that chance chose `.


    The notion of perfect Bayesian equilibrium may be refined by imposing
 additional constraints on players’ beliefs after unexpected events. For
 example, one can require that if at some point the players other than i
 conclude that i is certainly not of type θi then they never subsequently
 reverse this conclusion. This requirement has been used in some of the
 literature (see for example Osborne and Rubinstein (1990, pp. 96–97)).
 The following example shows, however, that there are games in which no
 perfect Bayesian equilibrium satisfies it: in all perfect Bayesian equilibria
 of the game we describe, a player who at some point assigns probability
 zero to some history later assigns positive probability to this history.
 Example 236.1         In any sequential equilibrium of the game in Fig-
  ure 236.1
   •   player 1 chooses C after the history r
   •   player 1 chooses X after the history (r, C, C)
   •   player 2 chooses C at his information set I 1
   •   player 2 chooses X with probability at least 45 at his information set
       I 2 (otherwise player 1 chooses C after the histories ` and (`, C, C),
       so that player 2 assigns probability 1 to the history (`, C, C, C) at
       his information set I 2 , making C inferior to X)
   •   player 1 chooses X after the history `.
 Thus player 2’s belief at I 1 assigns probability 1 to the history r while
 his belief at I 2 assigns positive probability to chance having chosen `
 (otherwise C is better than X).
 12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium          237



? Exercise 237.1     Players 1 and 2 bargain over an item whose value for
 player 1 is 0 or 3, with equal probabilities. Player 1 knows the value of
 the object, while player 2 is informed of this value only after he purchases
 it. The value of the object to player 2 is its value to player 1 plus 2. The
 bargaining procedure is: player 1 makes an offer, which player 2 either
 accepts or rejects; in the event of rejection player 1 makes another offer,
 which player 2 either accepts or rejects. If no offer is accepted, player 1
 is left with the object and obtains a payoff equal to its value; player 2’s
 payoff is 0. Take the set of possible offers to be finite, including 2 and 5.
 Show that there is a sequential equilibrium in pure strategies in which
 there is no deal when player 1’s valuation is 3, while the object is sold
 at the price of two in the first period when player 1’s valuation is 0.

 12.3.1   Signaling Games
 A signaling game is a Bayesian extensive game with observable actions
 that has the following simple form. There are two players, a “sender”
 and a “receiver”. The sender is informed of the value of an uncertain
 parameter θ1 and then chooses an action m (referred to as a message,
 though it may be payoff-relevant). The receiver observes the message
 (but not the value of θ1 ) and takes an action a. Each player’s payoff
 depends upon the value of θ1 , the message m sent by the sender, and
 the action a taken by the receiver.
    Formally, a signaling game is a Bayesian extensive game with ob-
 servable actions hΓ, (Θi ), (pi ), (ui )i in which Γ is a two-player game form
 in which first player 1 takes an action then player 2 takes an action, and
 Θ2 is a singleton.
    The tension in such a game arises from the fact that the receiver con-
 trols the action while the sender controls the information. The receiver
 has an incentive to try to deduce the sender’s type from the sender’s
 message, and the sender may have an incentive to mislead the receiver.
    A well-known simple example of a signaling game is the following,
 proposed by Spence (1974).
 Example 237.2 (Spence’s model of education) A worker (the sender)
  knows her talent θ1 while her employer (the receiver) does not. The
  value of the worker to the employer is the expectation of θ1 ; we assume
  that the employer pays the worker a wage w that is equal to this ex-
  pectation. (The economic story that underlies this assumption is that
  there are many employers who compete for the worker, so that her wage
  is driven up to the expectation of θ1 .) To model this behavioral as-
 238                                      Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium



 sumption we assume that the payoff of the employer is −(w − θ1 )2 (the
 expectation of which is maximized when w = E(θ1 )). The worker’s mes-
 sage is the amount e of education that she obtains and her payoff is
 w − e/θ (reflecting the assumption that the larger is θ the easier it is
 for a worker to acquire education). Assume that the worker’s talent is
 either θ1L or θ1H > θ1L , and denote the probabilities of these values by pL
 and pH . Restrict attention to pure strategy equilibria and denote the
 choices (messages) of the two types by eL and eH . This game has two
 types of perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
    Pooling Equilibrium In one type of equilibrium both types choose
 the same level of education (eL = eH = e∗ ) and the wage is w∗ =
 pH θ1H + pL θ1L . The possible values of e∗ are determined as follows. If a
 worker chooses a value of e different from e∗ then in an equilibrium the
 employer must pay her a wage w(e) for which w(e)−e/θ1K ≤ w∗ −e∗ /θ1K
 for K = L, H. The easiest way to satisfy this inequality is by making the
 employer believe that every deviation originates from a type θ1L worker,
 so that w(e) = θ1L for e 6= e∗ . The most profitable deviation for the
 worker is then to choose eL = 0, so that we need θ1L ≤ w∗ − e∗ /θ1L ,
 which is equivalent to e∗ ≤ θ1L pH (θ1H − θ1L ).
    Separating Equilibrium In another type of equilibrium the two types
 of worker choose different levels of education. In this case eL = 0 (since
 the wage paid to a type θ1L worker is θ1L , independent of eL ). For it to
 be unprofitable for either type to mimic the other we need

              θ1L ≥ θ1H − eH /θ1L   and     θ1H − eH /θ1H ≥ θ1L ,

 which are equivalent to θ1L (θ1H − θ1L ) ≤ eH ≤ θ1H (θ1H − θ1L ). Since θ1H >
 θ1L , a separating equilibrium thus always exists; the messages eL = 0
 and eH ∈ [θ1L (θ1H − θ1L ), θ1H (θ1H − θ1L )] are supported as a part of an
 equilibrium in which any action other than eH leads the employer to
 conclude that the worker’s type is θ1L .
? Exercise 238.1    Verify that the perfect Bayesian equilibria that we
 have described are also sequential equilibria.
   Example 246.1 in the next section shows how a refinement of the
 notion of sequential equilibrium excludes most of these equilibria.

 12.3.2   Modeling Reputation
 In Section 6.5 we study two finite horizon games that highlight the fact
 that in a subgame perfect equilibrium a player maintains the assump-
  12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium           239



  tion that another player intends to adhere to his equilibrium strategy
  even after that player has deviated from this strategy many times. For
  example, in the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of the chain-store
  game (a finite horizon extensive game with perfect information) every
  challenger believes that the chain-store will acquiesce to its entry even
  after a history in which the chain-store has fought every one of a large
  number of entrants.
     One way to capture the idea that after such a history a player may
  begin to entertain doubts about the intentions of his opponents is to
  study a model in which at the very beginning of the game there is a
  small chance that the opponents have motives different from those cap-
  tured in the original extensive form. (The aberrant players that are thus
  included, with small probability, in the strategic calculations of their op-
  ponents are often referred to as “crazy” or “irrational”, although their
  payoffs, not their strategic reasoning, diverge from the standard.) In
  such a “perturbed” game the regular types may find it advantageous
  to imitate the aberrant types at the beginning of the game: the short-
  term loss from doing so may be more than outweighed by the long-term
  gain from maintaining their opponents’ doubts about their motivations.
  Thus such a game can capture the idea that people may act as if they
  are “crazy” because doing so leads their opponents to respond in such
  a way that even according to their real, “sane”, preferences they are
  better off. The following example illustrates this approach.
 Example 239.1 (A perturbation of the chain-store game) Consider the
  variant of the chain-store game in which there is small probability, at
  the beginning of the game, that the chain-store prefers to fight than
  to accommodate entry. Precisely, consider the Bayesian extensive game
  with observable actions hΓ, (Θi ), (pi ), (ui )i in which Γ is the game form of
  the chain-store game (Section 6.5.1), ΘCS = {R(egular), T(ough)}, Θk is
  a singleton for every potential competitor k = 1, . . . , K, pCS (R) = 1 − ,
  pCS (T ) = , and the payoff functions ui are defined as follows. For any
  terminal history h of Γ, let hk be the sequence of actions in period k. The
  payoff of each challenger k is independent of the type of the chain-store
  and is given by
                                 
                                 b           if hk = (In, C)
                     uk (θ, h) = b − 1 if hk = (In, F )
                                 
                                    0         if hk = Out,
  where 0 < b < 1. The payoff uCS (θ, h) of the chain-store is the sum of
240                                    Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium



its payoffs in the K periods, where its payoff in period k is given by
   
   0      if hk = (In, C) and θCS = R, or hk = (In, F ) and θCS = T
      −1 if hk = (In, F ) and θCS = R, or hk = (In, C) and θCS = T
   
      a    if hk = Out,
where a > 1. In other words, for both types of chain-store the best
outcome in any period is that the challenger stays out; the regular chain-
store prefers to accommodate an entrant than to fight (fighting is costly),
while the tough chain-store prefers to fight than to accommodate.
   We do not characterize all perfect Bayesian equilibria of the game but
merely describe an equilibrium that differs radically from the unique
subgame perfect equilibrium of the perfect information game. This equi-
librium has the following features: so long as no challenger enters the
challengers maintain their original belief that the chain-store is tough
with probability ; entry that is accommodated leads the challengers to
switch to believing that the chain-store is definitely not tough; entry
that is fought leads the challengers to maintain or increase the proba-
bility that they assign to the chain-store being tough. Consequently it
is optimal for a regular chain-store, as well as a tough one, to threaten
to fight any entry that occurs, at least until the horizon impends. This
threat deters all entry until the horizon gets close, when the regular
chain-store’s threats become less firm: it cooperates with entrants with
positive probability, behavior that is consistent with the entrants begin-
ning to enter with positive probability. Once a challenger enters and the
chain-store cooperates with it, the challengers switch to believing that
the chain-store is certainly regular and henceforth always enter.
   Precisely, the equilibrium is given as follows. The actions prescribed
by the strategy σCS (R) of the regular chain-store and by the strategy
σk of each challenger k after any history depend on µCS (h)(T ), the
probability assigned by the challengers after the history h to the chain-
store being tough. The chain-store has to move only after histories that
end with entry by a challenger. For any such history h, denote by t(h) the
number of challengers who have moved, so that σCS (R)(h) prescribes the
response of the chain-store to challenger t(h). The strategy of a regular
chain-store is then given by
                   
                   C       if t(h) = K
     σCS (R)(h) = F         if t(h) ≤ K − 1 and µCS (h)(T ) ≥ bK−t(h)
                    h
                     mCS if t(h) ≤ K − 1 and µCS (h)(T ) < bK−t(h)
if P (h) = CS, where mhCS is the mixed strategy in which F is used
12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium        241



with probability [(1 − bK−t(h) )µCS (h)(T )]/[(1 − µCS (h)(T ))bK−t(h) ] and
C is used with the complementary probability; the strategy of a tough
chain-store is given by

                      σCS (T )(h) = F if P (h) = CS.

The strategy of challenger k is given by
                         Out if µCS (h)(T ) > bK−k+1
                        

               σk (h) = mk if µCS (h)(T ) = bK−k+1
                                 if µCS (h)(T ) < bK−k+1
                        
                          In
if P (h) = k (so that t(h) = k − 1), where mk is the mixed strategy in
which Out is used with probability 1/a and In is used with probability
1 − 1/a. The challengers’ beliefs are as follows: µCS (∅)(T ) = , and
for any history h with P (h) = k we have µCS (h, In) = µCS (h) and the
probability µCS (h, hk )(T ) assigned by challenger k + 1 to the chain-store
being tough is
      
       µCS (h)(T )                if hk = Out
        max{bK−k , µCS (h)(T )} if hk = (In, F ) and µCS (h)(T ) > 0
        0                          if hk = (In, C) or µCS (h)(T ) = 0.
      

   To understand this equilibrium consider Figure 242.1, which shows,
for each value of k, the belief of challenger k at the beginning of pe-
riod k along the equilibrium path that the chain-store is tough. The
                                                                ∗
number k ∗ is the smallest value of k for which  < bK−k +1 . Along
the equilibrium path through period k ∗ the challengers maintain their
original belief that the chain-store is tough with probability ; all chal-
lengers through k ∗ − 1 stay out. (If, contrary to its strategy, one of
them enters then the regular chain-store, as well as the tough one, re-
sponds by fighting, after which the beliefs of subsequent challengers that
                                                                       ∗
the chain-store is tough are also maintained at .) Since  < bK−k +1 ,
challenger k ∗ enters. The regular chain-store responds by randomizing
                                                                    ∗
between fighting and cooperating (since µCS (h)(T ) =  < bK−k ). The
probabilities it uses are such that after it fights, the probability (cal-
                                                       ∗
culated using Bayes’ rule) that it is tough is bK−k , the point on the
graph of bK−k+1 for period k ∗ + 1. (This has the implication that the
closer µCS (h)(T ) is to the graph of bK−k+1 , the higher is the probability
that the regular chain-store fights in the event of entry.) If the chain-
store cooperates (as the regular one does with positive probability) the
probability that the challengers assign to the chain-store’s being tough
becomes zero.
242                                                            Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium

                                                                                                                  r
                                                                                                              ...
                                                                                                    In, F....
                                                                                                        ..
                                                                                                 .r....
                                                                                                   .........      r
                                                                                              .. .
                                                                             In, F .... ... Out
                                                                                         ..          .
                                                                                                     ..
                                                                                     ...               ..
       r         r         r         r         r         r         r
        ...................................................................... .r....                   ..
                                                                                    ...                   ..
                                                                                       ... In, C ....
                                                                                          .                  ..
                                 bK−k+1                                     In, C ...                         ..
                                                                                            ...                 .
                                                                                               ..r.............r
       0                                                                     k∗                          k→

Figure 242.1 The belief of the challengers at the beginning of each period that the
chain-store is tough along an equilibrium path of the perfect Bayesian equilibrium
for the perturbation of the chain-store game described in the text. Possible beliefs
along the path are indicated by small disks. Possible transitions are indicated by
dotted lines; the label adjacent to each dotted line indicates the sequence of actions
that induces the transition. (Note that only transitions that can occur with posi-
tive probability along the equilibrium path are indicated; more are possible off the
equilibrium path.)


   If the chain-store fights the entrant in period k ∗ then the probability
that challenger k ∗ + 1 assigns to the chain-store’s being tough rises to
       ∗
bK−k , so that challenger k ∗ + 1 randomizes between entering and not.
If challenger k ∗ + 1 does not enter then the belief that the chain-store
is tough remains the same and challenger k ∗ + 2 definitely enters. If
challenger k ∗ + 1 enters and the chain-store fights then the probability
assigned to the chain-store’s being tough again rises to the graph of
bK−k+1 . If challenger k ∗ + 1 enters and the chain-store cooperates then
the probability assigned to the chain-store’s being tough falls to zero
and challenger k ∗ + 2 enters. The same pattern continues until the end
of the game: in any period in which the challenger’s belief lies below
the graph the challenger enters; if the chain-store responds by fighting
then the belief of the subsequent challenger rises to the graph. In any
period in which the challenger’s belief is on the graph the challenger
randomizes; if it does not enter then the belief is unchanged, while if it
enters and is fought then the belief again rises to the graph. In every
case the result of the chain-store’s cooperating is that the probability
that the challengers assign to its being tough falls to zero.
   Note that if the belief of any challenger k is given by a point on the
graph then after a history h that ends with the decision by k to enter
the probability that the chain-store fights is µCS (h)(R) · σCS (R)(h)(F ) +
µCS (h)(T ) · 1 = (1 − bK−k+1 )[(1 − bK−k )bK−k+1 ]/[(1 − bK−k+1 )bK−k ] +
 12.4 Refinements of Sequential Equilibrium                             243



 bK−k+1 = b, making challenger k indifferent between entering and stay-
 ing out. The probability with which the challenger chooses to enter
 makes the chain-store’s expected payoff 0 regardless of its future ac-
 tions. Similarly, if the belief of any challenger k is given by a point
 below (above) the graph then the probability that the chain-store fights
 is less (greater) than b, making it optimal for challenger k to enter (stay
 out).
    The number of periods remaining after the first entry of a challenger
 (K − k ∗ in the case just described) is independent of the length of the
 game. Thus the longer the game, the more periods in which no challenger
 enters.
? Exercise 243.1   Complete the proof that the pair ((σi ), (µi )) described
 above is a perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the game.
   Sometimes it is said that the regular chain-store “builds reputation”
 in this equilibrium. Note, however, that along the equilibrium path
 no reputation is built: no entry takes place until the final few periods,
 so that even though the regular chain-store would fight entry were it
 to occur, it does not get the opportunity to do so. This response of a
 regular chain-store to a deviation by a challenger at the beginning of the
 game is necessary in order to maintain the doubt that the challengers
 hold about the motivation of the chain-store, a doubt required to deter
 them from entering. The considerations of the regular chain-store after
 such (out-of-equilibrium) entry near the beginning of the game are like
 those of a player who wants to build, or at least maintain, a reputation.

 12.4   Refinements of Sequential Equilibrium

 The concept of sequential equilibrium permits great (though as we have
 seen not complete) freedom regarding the beliefs that players hold when
 they observe actions that are not consistent with the equilibrium strate-
 gies. An advantage of including beliefs as part of the specification of an
 equilibrium is that it allows us to discuss further restrictions on these
 beliefs. Many such restrictions have been proposed; the new solution
 concepts that arise are referred to in the literature as refinements of
 sequential equilibrium. We give only a very brief introduction to the
 subject.
    The notion of sequential equilibrium essentially bases beliefs on the
 equilibrium strategies and imposes only “structural” restrictions on out-
 of-equilibrium beliefs. The refinements of sequential equilibrium intro-
 244                                        Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium


                              1b
                             PPP
                    L                    PP R
                         
                              M                 PP
             r                pr p p p p p p p p p p p p p p P  Pr
                                                              p pPp
                                                        P
                                               2
           2, 2             ` @ r                             ` @ r
                          r           @r                   r         @r
                                    @                               @
                        1, 3           0, 0              0, 0        5, 1

 Figure 244.1 This game has a sequential equilibrium with the outcome (L, `),
 though player 2’s belief in such an equilibrium has the undesirable feature that it
 assigns a positive probability to player 1’s having chosen the action M , which is
 strictly dominated by L.


 duce new strategic considerations, as demonstrated by the following
 example.
 Example 244.1 The game in Figure 244.1 has a sequential equilib-
  rium with the outcome (R, r). It also has a sequential equilibrium with
  the outcome (L, `), in which player 2 believes, in the event that his in-
  formation set is reached, that with high probability player 1 chose M .
  However, if player 2’s information set is reached then a reasonable ar-
  gument for him may be that since the action M for player 1 is strictly
  dominated by L it is not rational for player 1 to choose M and hence she
  must have chosen R. This argument excludes any belief that supports
  (L, `) as a sequential equilibrium outcome.
   The next example further illustrates the strategic considerations in-
 troduced in the previous example.
 Example 244.2 (Beer or Quiche) Consider the game in Figure 245.1,
  a signaling game in which there are two types of player 1, strong and
  weak, the probabilities of these types are 0.9 and 0.1 respectively, the set
  of messages is {B, Q} (the consumption of beer or quiche for breakfast),
  and player 2 has two actions, F(ight) or N(ot). Player 1’s payoff is the
  sum of two elements: she obtains two units if player 2 does not fight and
  one unit if she consumes her preferred breakfast (B if she is strong and Q
  if she is weak). Player 2’s payoff does not depend on player 1’s breakfast;
  it is 1 if he fights the weak type or if he does not fight the strong type.
     This game has two types of sequential equilibrium, as follows.
   •   Both types of player 1 choose B, and player 2 fights if he observes
       Q and not if he observes B. If player 2 observes Q then he assigns
       probability of at least 0.5 that player 1 is weak.
12.4 Refinements of Sequential Equilibrium                                    245


                2,r1              0,r0                 3,r0           1,r1
                  @                                      @
                   N@           F                           @
                        @pr p p p p p p p p p 2p p p p p p N    @r
                                                           p p p p   F

                       Q                                           Q
                               strong cb weak
                      1r                                          r1
                                 0.9                  0.1
                      B                                            B
                        pr p p p p p p p p p 2p p p p p p p p p p r
                    N    @ F                              N       @ F
                             @                                       @
                  r             @r                      r             @r
                3, 1             1, 0                 2, 0             0, 1

            Figure 245.1 The game Beer or Quiche (Example 244.2).


  •   Both types of player 1 choose Q, and player 2 fights if he observes
      B and not if he observes Q. If player 2 observes B then he assigns
      probability of at least 0.5 that player 1 is weak.
   The following argument suggests that an equilibrium of the second
type is not reasonable. If player 2 observes that player 1 chose B then
he should conclude that player 1 is strong, as follows. If player 1 is
weak then she should realize that the choice of B is worse for her than
following the equilibrium (in which she obtains the payoff 3), whatever
the response of player 2. Further, if player 1 is strong and if player 2
concludes from player 1 choosing B that she is strong and consequently
chooses N , then player 1 is indeed better off than she is in the equilibrium
(in which she obtains 2). Thus it is reasonable for a strong type of
player 1 to deviate from the equilibrium, anticipating that player 2 will
reason that indeed she is strong, so that player 2’s belief that player 1 is
weak with positive probability when she observes B is not reasonable.
   The argument in this example is weaker than that in the previous
example. In the previous example the argument uses only the fact that
the action M is dominated and thus is independent of the equilibrium
that is eliminated. By contrast, in the game here the argument is relative
to the equilibrium that is eliminated. Unless the supposition is that the
players behave according to an equilibrium in which both types choose
Q, there is no basis for the argument that the message B must come from
a strong type. This raises a criticism: if the basis of the argument is that
the situation in which both types of player 1 choose Q is an equilibrium
then perhaps player 2 should conclude after observing a deviation simply
  246                                      Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium



  that player 1 is not rational or does not understand the structure of the
  game, rather than assume that she is rationally trying to send him a
  strategic signal.
 Example 246.1 (Spence’s model of education) We first argue that all
  the pooling equilibria of the game in Example 237.2 are eliminated by
  arguments like those in the previous example. Let e satisfy w∗ −e∗ /θ1L >
  θ1H −e/θ1L and w∗ −e∗ /θ1H < θ1H −e/θ1H . (Such a value of e clearly exists.)
  If a worker of type θ1H deviates and chooses e (which exceeds e∗ ) then
  the firms should conclude that the deviation comes from type θ1H since
  type θ1L is worse off if she so deviates even if she persuades the firms that
  she is of type θ1H , while type θ1H is better off if she so deviates. Thus the
  firms should respond to such a deviation by paying a wage of θ1H , which
  makes the deviation profitable for a worker of type θ1H .
     Now consider separating equilibria. In such an equilibrium eL = 0
  and θ1H − eH /θ1L ≤ θ1L . If θ1H − eH /θ1L < θ1L then a worker of type θ1H
  can deviate by slightly reducing the value of e, arguing that she is not of
  type θ1L , who would lose from such a deviation whatever best response
  the firm used (that is, even if she were paid θ1H ). Thus in all sequen-
  tial equilibria that survive this argument, the level eH of education of
  type θ1H solves the equation θ1H − eH /θ1L = θ1L .
? Exercise 246.2 (Pre-trial negotiation)    Player 1 is involved in an acci-
  dent with player 2. Player 1 knows whether she is negligent or not, but
  player 2 does not know; if the case comes to court the judge learns the
  truth. Player 1 sends a “take-it-or-leave-it” pre-trial offer of compensa-
  tion that must be either 3 or 5, which player 2 either accepts or rejects.
  If he accepts the offer the parties do not go to court. If he rejects it the
  parties go to court and player 1 has to pay 5 to player 2 if he is negligent
  and 0 otherwise; in either case player 1 has to pay the court expenses
  of 6. The payoffs are summarized in Figure 247.1. Formulate this sit-
  uation as a signaling game and find its sequential equilibria. Suggest
  a criterion for ruling out unreasonable equilibria. (Consult Banks and
  Sobel (1987).)

  12.5   Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium

  The notions of subgame perfect equilibrium and sequential equilibrium
  treat the requirement of sequential rationality as part of the players’
  strategic reasoning; they invoke the assumption that the players are ra-
  tional not only in selecting their actions on the equilibrium path but also
12.5 Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium                                  247



                 Y         N                      Y            N

           3   −3, 3     −6, 0              3    −3, 3    −11, 5

           5   −5, 5     −6, 0              5    −5, 5    −11, 5

         Player 1 is non-negligent.         Player 1 is negligent.

                 Figure 247.1 The payoffs in Exercise 246.2.



in forming beliefs about the other players’ plans regarding events that
do not occur in equilibrium. The solution concepts that we study in this
section follow a different route: they treat the players’ rationality with
respect to out-of-equilibrium events as the result of each player’s taking
into account that the other players could make uncorrelated mistakes
(their hands may tremble) that lead to these unexpected events. The
basic idea is that each player’s actions be optimal not only given his
equilibrium beliefs but also given a perturbed belief that allows for the
possibility of slight mistakes. These mistakes are not modeled as part
of the description of the game. Rather, a strategy profile is defined to
be stable if it satisfies sequential rationality given some beliefs that are
generated by a strategy profile that is a perturbation of the equilibrium
strategy profile, embodying “small” mistakes. Note that the perturbed
strategy profile is common to all players and the equilibrium strategy
profile is required to be sequentially rational only with respect to a single
such profile.
   The requirement that a player’s strategy be optimal not only against
the other players’ equilibrium strategies but also against a perturba-
tion of these strategies that incorporates the possibility of small mis-
takes is powerful even in strategic games. We begin by studying such
games; subsequently we turn back to extensive games with imperfect
information.


12.5.1   Strategic Games

Recall that we say that a player’s strategy in a strategic game is com-
pletely mixed if it assigns positive probability to each of the player’s
actions.
  248                                     Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium



                                  A     B      C

                            A    0, 0   0, 0   0, 0

                            B    0, 0   1, 1   2, 0

                            C    0, 0   0, 2   2, 2

  Figure 248.1 A strategic game in which there are Nash equilibria ((A, A) and
  (C, C)) that are not trembling hand perfect.


I Definition 248.1 A trembling hand perfect equilibrium of a finite
  strategic game is a mixed strategy profile σ with the property that there
  exists a sequence (σ k )∞k=0 of completely mixed strategy profiles that
  converges to σ such that for each player i the strategy σi is a best
               k
  response to σ−i  for all values of k.
     Let σ be a trembling hand perfect equilibrium. Since each player’s
  expected payoff is continuous in the vector of the other players’ mixed
  strategies it follows that for each player i the strategy σi is a best re-
  sponse to σ−i , so that every trembling hand perfect equilibrium is a Nash
  equilibrium. Note that the definition requires only that each player’s
  strategy be a best response to some sequence of perturbed strategy
  profiles in which the probabilities of mistakes converge to zero; all play-
  ers’ strategies must be best responses to the same sequence of strategy
  profiles, but they need not be best responses to all such sequences.
     The game in Figure 248.1 shows that not all Nash equilibria are trem-
  bling hand perfect: (B, B) is the only trembling hand perfect equilibrium
  of the game.
     In Section 4.3 we defined the notion of a weakly dominated action in
  a strategic game; a player has no reason to use such an action, although,
  depending on the other players’ behavior, he may have no reason not to
  use such an action either. The notion of Nash equilibrium does not rule
  out the use of such actions (see, for example, the actions A and C in the
  game in Figure 248.1), but the notion of trembling hand perfect equilib-
  rium does, since a weakly dominated strategy is not a best response to
  a vector of completely mixed strategies.
     In a two-player game we have the following stronger result.
  Proposition 248.2 A strategy profile in a finite two-player strategic
  game is a trembling hand perfect equilibrium if and only if it is a mixed
12.5 Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium                                           249



                     L            R                     L             R

             T    1, 1, 1       1, 0, 1          T    1, 1, 0       0, 0, 0

             B    1, 1, 1       0, 0, 1         B     0, 1, 0       1, 0, 0

                            `                                   r
Figure 249.1 A three-player strategic game in which there is a Nash equilibrium
((B, L, `)) that is not trembling hand perfect but in which every player’s strategy is
undominated.


strategy Nash equilibrium and the strategy of neither player is weakly
dominated.
Proof. It remains to show only that a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
in which the action of each player is not weakly dominated is trembling
hand perfect. Let σ ∗ be a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium in which
the strategy σi∗ of neither player i is weakly dominated. By the result
in Exercise 64.2, the strategy σi∗ of each player i is a best response to
a completely mixed strategy, say σj0 of player j 6= i. For any  > 0 let
σj () = (1 −)σj∗ +σj0 . This strategy is completely mixed and converges
to σj∗ ; further, σi∗ is a best response to it. Thus σ ∗ is a trembling hand
perfect equilibrium.                                                       2
  That the same is not true for a game with more than two players is
demonstrated by the three-player game in Figure 249.1. In this game
the Nash equilibrium (B, L, `) is undominated but is not trembling hand
perfect (player 1’s payoff to T exceeds her payoff to B whenever players 2
and 3 assign small enough positive probability to R and r respectively).
  The following result shows that every strategic game has a trembling
hand perfect equilibrium.
Proposition 249.1 Every finite strategic game has a trembling hand
perfect equilibrium.
Proof. Define a perturbation of the game by letting the set of actions
of each player i be the set of mixed strategies of player i that assign
probability of at least ji to each action j of player i, for some collection
(ji ) with ji > 0 for each i and j. (That is, constrain each player to use
each action available to him with some minimal probability.) Every such
perturbed game has a Nash equilibrium by Proposition 20.3. Consider a
sequence of such perturbed games in which ji → 0 for all i and j; by the
250                                        Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium



                                                           L      R
               1b
            A @B                                  A, a    1, 1   1, 1
           r       @r2
                   @
         1, 1     L @R                            A, b    1, 1   1, 1
                r       @r1
                        @
              0, 2     a @b
                                                  B, a    0, 2   2, 0
                     r      @r
                            @
                   2, 0      3, 3
                                                  B, b    0, 2   3, 3

Figure 250.1 An extensive game (left) whose strategic form (right) has a trembling
hand perfect equilibrium (((A, a), L)) that is not a subgame perfect equilibrium.


compactness of the set of strategy profiles, some sequence of selections
from the sets of Nash equilibria of the games in the sequence converges,
say to σ ∗ . It may be verified that σ ∗ corresponds to a trembling hand
perfect equilibrium of the game.                                       2

12.5.2   Extensive Games
We now extend the idea of trembling hand perfection to the model of an
extensive game. The game in Figure 250.1 shows that a straightforward
generalization of Definition 248.1 has an unsatisfactory feature. This
game has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium ((B, b), R). However,
the strategy pair ((A, a), L) is a trembling hand perfect equilibrium of
the strategic form of the game, since the strategy (A, a) of player 1 is a
best response to any strategy of player 2 for which the probability of L is
close enough to 1, and L is a best response to any strategy of player 1 for
which the probability of (A, a) is close enough to 1 and the probability of
(B, a) is sufficiently high compared with the probability of (B, b). The
point is that when evaluating the optimality of her strategy player 1
does not consider the possibility that she herself will make mistakes
when carrying out this strategy. If she does allow for mistakes, and
considers that in attempting to carry out her strategy she may choose B
rather than A at the start of the game (in addition to considering that
player 2 may make a mistake and choose R rather than L) then it is no
longer optimal for her to choose a at her second information set.
   These considerations lead us to study the trembling hand perfect equi-
libria not of the strategic form but of the agent strategic form of the
game, in which there is one player for each information set in the exten-
  12.5 Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium                                     251



  sive game: each player in the extensive game is split into a number of
  agents, one for each of his information sets, all agents of a given player
  having the same payoffs. (Note that any mixed strategy profile σ in the
  agent strategic form corresponds to the behavioral strategy profile β in
  which βi (Ii ) is the mixed strategy of player i’s agent at the information
  set Ii .) Thus we make the following definition.
I Definition 251.1 A trembling hand perfect equilibrium of a finite
  extensive game is a behavioral strategy profile that corresponds to a
  trembling hand perfect equilibrium of the agent strategic form of the
  game.
     The behavioral strategy profile ((A, a), L) is not a trembling hand per-
  fect equilibrium of the extensive game in Figure 250.1 since for any pair
  of completely mixed strategies of player 1’s first agent and player 2 the
  unique best response of player 1’s second agent is the pure strategy b.
  More generally, we can show that every trembling hand perfect equilib-
  rium of a finite extensive game with perfect recall corresponds to the
  behavioral strategy profile of a sequential equilibrium.
  Proposition 251.2 For every trembling hand perfect equilibrium β of
  a finite extensive game with perfect recall there is a belief system µ such
  that (β, µ) is a sequential equilibrium of the game.
  Proof. Let (β k ) be the sequence of completely mixed behavioral strategy
  profiles that corresponds to the sequence of mixed strategy profiles in the
  agent strategic form of the game that is associated with the equilibrium
  β. At each information set Ii of each player i in the game, define the
  belief µ(Ii ) to be the limit of the beliefs defined from β k using Bayes’ rule;
  (β, µ) is then a consistent assessment. Since every agent’s information
  set is reached with positive probability and every agent’s strategy is a
  best response to every β k it follows from the one deviation property for
  sequential equilibrium (see Exercise 227.1) that every such strategy is
  also a best response to β when the beliefs at each information set are
  defined by µ. Thus (β, µ) is a sequential equilibrium.                        2
     The converse of this result does not hold since in a game with simulta-
  neous moves every Nash equilibrium is the strategy profile of a sequen-
  tial equilibrium, but only those Nash equilibria in which no player’s
  strategy is weakly dominated can be trembling hand perfect. (In the
  simultaneous-move extensive game whose strategic form is given in Fig-
  ure 248.1, for example, (A, A) and (C, C) are the strategy profiles of se-
  quential equilibria but are not trembling hand perfect equilibria.) How-
 252                                               Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium


                          1b            C               2r       c       r1, 1, 1
                            D                                d
                          pr p p p p p p p 3p p p p p p p p r
                      L   @R                          L @R
                    r          @@r                  r          @r
                                                               @
                3, 3, 2        0, 0, 0          4, 4, 0        0, 0, 1

             Figure 252.1 The game Example 252.1 (Selten’s horse).


 ever, the converse is “almost” true: for almost every game the strategy
 profile of almost every sequential equilibrium is a trembling hand perfect
 equilibrium (see Kreps and Wilson (1982b, Theorems 1 and 3)).
   The next example illustrates the concept of trembling hand perfect
 equilibrium for the game that we studied in Example 225.2.
 Example 252.1 (Selten’s horse) As we saw in Example 225.2, the game
  in Figure 252.1 (and Figure 225.1) has two types of Nash equilibria.
  Equilibria of the first type, in which player 1 chooses D, player 2 chooses
  c with probability at least 31 , and player 3 chooses L, do not correspond
  to sequential equilibria; they are not trembling hand perfect, since if
  player 1 chooses C with positive probability and player 3 chooses L with
  probability close to 1 then d is better than c for player 2. Equilibria of the
  second type, in which player 1 chooses C, player 2 chooses c, and player 3
  chooses R with probability at least 43 , correspond to sequential equilibria
  and are also trembling hand perfect: take σ1 (D) = , σ2 (d) = 2/(1 − ),
  and σ3 (R) = σ3 (R) if σ3 (R) < 1 and σ3 (R) = 1 −  if σ3 (R) = 1.
    The game in Figure 253.1 shows that the set of trembling hand perfect
 equilibria of an extensive game is not a subset of the set of trembling
 hand perfect equilibria of its strategic form, and that in a trembling
 hand perfect equilibrium of an extensive game a player may use a weakly
 dominated strategy. The strategy profile ((L, r), R) is a trembling hand
 perfect equilibrium of the game (take a sequence of strategy profiles in
 which player 1’s second agent trembles more than player 2 does), but it
 is not a trembling hand perfect equilibrium of the strategic form of the
 game (since player 1’s strategy (L, r) is weakly dominated by (R, r)).
? Exercise 252.2    Show that the notion of trembling hand perfect equi-
 librium of an extensive game (like the notion of sequential equilibrium)
 is not invariant to the coalescing of moves (one of the principles studied
 in Section 11.2). (Use the game in Figure 253.1.)
 12.5 Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium                                      253



                                                               L      R

                      1b                               L, `   0, 0   1, 1
                L  HH R
           2 r
                        HH
                              Hr1                      L, r   0, 0   1, 1
          L @R               ` @r
        r       @r
                @          r      @r
                                  @                    R, `   0, 0   0, 0
      0, 0       1, 1    0, 0      1, 1
                                                      R, r    1, 1   1, 1

 Figure 253.1 An extensive game (left) that has a trembling hand perfect equi-
 librium that does not correspond to any trembling hand perfect equilibrium of its
 strategic form (right).


    The next exercise gives an extensive game in all of whose trembling
 hand perfect equilibria at least one player uses a weakly dominated strat-
 egy (so that no such equilibrium is a trembling hand perfect equilibrium
 of the strategic form).
? Exercise 253.1     Two people are engaged in the following game to select
 either a good outcome or a bad outcome. First each of them names either
 himself or the other person as the one who will make the choice. If they
 both name the same person then that person selects the outcome. If
 each of them chooses himself then chance selects each of them with equal
 probability to make the choice. If each of them chooses the other then
 the good outcome is automatically chosen. At no point in the procedure
 is either person informed of the person initially selected by the other
 person. Each person’s payoff from the good outcome is 2, regardless of
 who chooses it; his payoff from the bad outcome is 1 if the other person
 chooses it and 0 if he himself chooses it. Show that the set of trembling
 hand perfect equilibria of this extensive game is disjoint from the set of
 behavioral strategy profiles associated with the trembling hand perfect
 equilibria of its strategic form; interpret the equilibria.
    We conclude the chapter by noting that it follows from Proposi-
 tion 249.1 that every finite extensive game with perfect recall has a
 trembling hand perfect equilibrium and hence, by Proposition 251.2, a
 sequential equilibrium.
 Corollary 253.2 Every finite extensive game with perfect recall has a
 trembling hand perfect equilibrium and thus also a sequential equilibrium.
254                                   Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium



Notes

The main contributors to the extension of the notion of subgame per-
fect equilibrium to games with imperfect information are Kreps, Selten,
and Wilson, who developed the two main solution concepts discussed
in this chapter: trembling hand perfect equilibrium (Selten (1975)) and
sequential equilibrium (Kreps and Wilson (1982b)).
   Section 12.2 relies on ideas and examples that appear in Kreps and
Wilson (1982b) and many subsequent papers. For a review of the con-
cept of sequential equilibrium see Kreps (1990b). Example 223.1 and Ex-
ercise 229.1 are due to Kreps and Ramey (1987) and Battigalli (1988).
Example 225.2 is due to Selten (1975), Exercise 226.1 to Kreps and
Wilson (1982b), Example 226.2 to Kohlberg and Mertens (1986), Ex-
ercise 227.1 to Hendon, Jacobsen, and Sloth (1996), Example 228.2
to Kreps and Ramey (1987), Example 229.2 to Battigalli (1996), and
Example 230.1 to Kohlberg and Reny (1997).
   The discussion of perfect Bayesian equilibrium in Section 12.3 is based
on Fudenberg and Tirole (1991b), which contains Proposition 234.1 and
Example 234.3. Example 236.1 is based on Madrigal, Tan, and Wer-
lang (1987). Sections 12.3.1 and 12.4 are based on Cho and Kreps (1987).
The model of reputation in Section 12.3.2 is based on Kreps and Wil-
son (1982a) (see also Milgrom and Roberts (1982)); Fudenberg and
Maskin (1986, Section 5) show that the type of irrationality that is
incorporated in the model may dictate the equilibrium outcome. Exer-
cise 246.2 is due to Banks and Sobel (1987).
   Most of the material in Section 12.5, which discusses the notion of
trembling hand perfect equilibrium, is taken from Selten (1975). Propo-
sition 248.2 was discovered independently by Cave, Kohlberg, and van
Damme. Proposition 251.2 is due to Kreps and Wilson (1982b). The
game in Exercise 253.1 is taken from Mertens (1995).
   Battigalli (1996) studies sequential equilibrium and perfect Bayesian
equilibrium and gives an alternative characterization of consistency for
a class of games. Kohlberg and Reny (1997) formulate an equivalent
definition of sequential equilibrium using systems of “relative” probabil-
ities. As we have mentioned, there are many refinements of the notion
of sequential equilibrium; especially noteworthy is the work of Kohlberg
and Mertens (1986). Myerson (1978) studies a variant of the notion of
trembling hand perfect equilibrium called “proper equilibrium”.
   Kohlberg (1990) and van Damme (1992) are surveys of the literature
on refinements of Nash equilibrium.
IV Coalitional Games




The primitives of the models we study in Parts I, II, and III (often
referred to as “noncooperative” games) are the players’ sets of possi-
ble actions and their preferences over the possible outcomes, where an
outcome is a profile of actions; each action is taken by a single player
autonomously. In this part we study the model of a coalitional game.
One primitive of this model is the collection of sets of joint actions that
each group of players (coalition) can take independently of the remain-
ing players. An outcome of a coalitional game is a specification of the
coalition that forms and the joint action it takes. (More general mod-
els, in which many coalitions may form simultaneously, are discussed in
the literature.) The other primitive of the model of a coalitional game
is the profile of the players’ preferences over the set of all possible out-
comes. Thus although actions are taken by coalitions, the theory is based
(as are the theories in the other parts of the book) on the individuals’
preferences.
   A solution concept for coalitional games assigns to each game a set
of outcomes. As before, each solution concept we study captures the
consequences of a natural line of reasoning for the participants in a game;
it defines a set of arrangements that are stable in some sense. In general
the stability requirement is that the outcome be immune to deviations
of a certain sort by groups of players; by contrast, most (though not all)
solutions for noncooperative games require immunity to deviations by
individual players. Many variants of the solution concepts we study are
analyzed in the literature; we consider a sample designed to illustrate
the main ideas.
   A coalitional model is distinguished from a noncooperative model pri-
marily by its focus on what groups of players can achieve rather than on
256



what individual players can do and by the fact that it does not consider
the details of how groups of players function internally. If we wish to
model the possibility of coalition formation in a noncooperative game
then we must specify how coalitions form and how their members choose
joint actions. These details are absent from a coalitional game, so that
the outcome of such a game does not depend on them.
   To illustrate the differences between the two modeling approaches,
consider the following situation. Each of a group of individuals owns a
bundle of inputs and has access to a technology for producing a valu-
able single output. Each individual’s inputs are unproductive in his
own technology but productive in some other individual’s technology.
A noncooperative model of this situation specifies precisely the set of
actions that is available to each individual: perhaps each individual can
announce a price vector at which he is willing to trade inputs, or perhaps
he can propose a distribution of inputs for the whole of the society. A
coalitional model, by contrast, starts from the sets of payoff vectors that
each group of individuals can jointly achieve. A coalition may use con-
tracts, threats, or promises to achieve a high level of production; these
institutions are not modeled explicitly in a coalitional game.
   We do not view either of the two approaches as superior or more
basic. Each of them reflects different kinds of strategic considerations
and contributes to our understanding of strategic reasoning. The study
of the interconnections between noncooperative and cooperative models
can also be illuminating.
  13          The Core




  The core is a solution concept for coalitional games that requires that no
  set of players be able to break away and take a joint action that makes
  all of them better off. After defining the concept and giving conditions
  for its nonemptiness, we explore its connection with the concept of a
  competitive equilibrium in a model of a market.

  13.1    Coalitional Games with Transferable Payoff

  We begin with a simple version of a coalitional game in which each group
  of players is associated with a single number, interpreted as the payoff
  that is available to the group; there are no restrictions on how this payoff
  may be divided among the members of the group.
I Definition 257.1 A coalitional game with transferable payoff
  consists of
   •   a finite set N (the set of players)
   •   a function v that associates with every nonempty subset S of N (a
       coalition) a real number v(S) (the worth of S).
    For each coalition S the number v(S) is the total payoff that is avail-
  able for division among the members of S. That is, the set of joint
  actions that the coalition S can take consists of all possible divisions of
  v(S) among the members of S. (Later, in Section 13.5, we define a more
  general notion of a coalitional game in which each coalition is associated
  with a set of payoff vectors that is not necessarily the set of all possible
  divisions of some fixed amount.)
    In many situations the payoff that a coalition can achieve depends on
  the actions taken by the other players. However, the interpretation of a
  258                                                        Chapter 13. The Core



  coalitional game that best fits our discussion is that it models a situation
  in which the actions of the players who are not part of S do not influence
  v(S). In the literature other interpretations are given to a coalitional
  game; for example, v(S) is sometimes interpreted to be the most payoff
  that the coalition S can guarantee independently of the behavior of the
  coalition N \ S. These other interpretations alter the interpretation of
  the solutions concepts defined; we do not discuss them here.
     Throughout this chapter and the next we assume that the coalitional
  games with transferable payoff that we study have the property that the
  worth of the coalition N of all players is at least as large as the sum of the
  worths of the members of any partition of N . This assumption ensures
  that it is optimal that the coalition N of all players form, as is required
  by our interpretations of the solution concepts we study (though the
  formal analysis is meaningful without the assumption).
I Definition 258.1 A coalitional game hN, vi with transferable payoff is
  cohesive if
                   K
                   X
         v(N ) ≥         v(Sk )   for every partition {S1 , . . . , SK } of N.
                   k=1

  (This is a special case of the condition of superadditivity, which requires
  that v(S ∪ T ) ≥ v(S) + v(T ) for all coalitions S and T with S ∩ T = ∅.)

  13.2   The Core

  The idea behind the core is analogous to that behind a Nash equilibrium
  of a noncooperative game: an outcome is stable if no deviation is prof-
  itable. In the case of the core, an outcome is stable if no coalition can
  deviate and obtain an outcome better for all its members. For a coali-
  tional game with transferable payoff the stability condition is that no
  coalition can obtain a payoff that exceeds the sum of its members’ cur-
  rent payoffs. Given our assumption that the game is cohesive we confine
  ourselves to outcomes in which the coalition N of all players forms.
     Let hN, vi be a coalitional game with transferable payoff. For any pro-
                                                                   P
  file (xi )i∈N of real numbers and any coalition S we let x(S) = i∈S xi .
  A vector (xi )i∈S of real numbers is an S-feasible payoff vector if
  x(S) = v(S). We refer to an N -feasible payoff vector as a feasible
  payoff profile.
I Definition 258.2 The core of the coalitional game with trans-
  ferable payoff hN, vi is the set of feasible payoff profiles (xi )i∈N for
 13.2 The Core                                                          259



 which there is no coalition S and S-feasible payoff vector (yi )i∈S for
 which yi > xi for all i ∈ S.
    A definition that is obviously equivalent is that the core is the set of
 feasible payoff profiles (xi )i∈N for which v(S) ≤ x(S) for every coali-
 tion S. Thus the core is the set of payoff profiles satisfying a system of
 weak linear inequalities and hence is closed and convex.
    The following examples indicate the wide range of situations that may
 be modeled as coalitional games and illustrate the notion of the core.
 Example 259.1 (A three-player majority game) Suppose that three
  players can obtain one unit of payoff, any two of them can obtain
  α ∈ [0, 1] independently of the actions of the third, and each player
  alone can obtain nothing, independently of the actions of the remaining
  two players. We can model this situation as the coalitional game hN, vi
  in which N = {1, 2, 3}, v(N ) = 1, v(S) = α whenever |S| = 2, and
  v({i}) = 0 for all i ∈ N . The core of this game is the set of all nonneg-
  ative payoff profiles (x1 , x2 , x3 ) for which x(N ) = 1 and x(S) ≥ α for
  every two-player coalition S. Hence the core is nonempty if and only if
  α ≤ 2/3.
 Example 259.2 An expedition of n people has discovered treasure in
  the mountains; each pair of them can carry out one piece. A coalitional
  game that models this situation is hN, vi, where
                           
                             |S|/2         if |S| is even
                   v(S) =
                             (|S| − 1)/2 if |S| is odd.
 If |N | ≥ 4 is even then the core consists of the single payoff profile
 ( 12 , . . . , 12 ). If |N | ≥ 3 is odd then the core is empty.
? Exercise 259.3 (A production economy)       A capitalist owns a factory
 and each of w workers owns only his own labor power. Workers alone
 can produce nothing; together with the capitalist, any group of m work-
 ers can produce output worth f (m), where f : R+ → R+ is a concave
 nondecreasing function with f (0) = 0. A coalitional game that models
 this situation is hN, vi where N = {c} ∪ W (player c being the capitalist
 and W the set of workers) and
                              
                                0            if c ∈
                                                  /S
                       v(S) =
                                f (|S ∩ W |) if c ∈ S.
 Show that the core of this game is {x ∈ RN : 0 ≤ xi ≤ f (w) − f (w − 1)
                P
 for i ∈ W and i∈N xi = f (w)}, where w = |W |, and interpret the
 members of this set. (See also Exercises 268.1, 289.1, and 295.2.)
 260                                                   Chapter 13. The Core


 Example 260.1 (A market for an indivisible good ) In a market for an
  indivisible good the set of buyers is B and the set of sellers is L. Each
  seller holds one unit of the good and has a reservation price of 0; each
  buyer wishes to purchase one unit of the good and has a reservation
  price of 1.
     We may model this market as a coalitional game with transferable
  payoff as follows: N = B ∪ L and v(S) = min{|S ∩ B|, |S ∩ L|} for
  each coalition S. If |B| > |L| then the core consists of the single payoff
  profile in which every seller receives 1 and every buyer receives 0. To
  see this, suppose that the payoff profile x is in the core. Let b be a
  buyer whose payoff is minimal among the payoffs of all the buyers and
  let ` be a seller whose payoff is minimal among the payoffs of all the
  sellers. Since x is in the core we have xb + x` ≥ v({b, `}) = 1 and
  |L| = v(N ) = x(N ) ≥ |B|xb + |L|x` ≥ (|B| − |L|)xb + |L|, which implies
  that xb = 0 and x` ≥ 1 and hence (using v(N ) = |L| and the fact that
  ` is the worst-off seller) xi = 1 for every seller i.
? Exercise 260.2      Calculate and interpret the core of this game when
 |B| = |L|.
 Example 260.3 (A majority game) A group of n players, where n ≥ 3
  is odd, has one unit to divide among its members. A coalition consisting
  of a majority of the players can divide the unit among its members as
  it wishes. This situation is modeled by the coalitional game hN, vi in
  which |N | = n and
                                  
                                    1 if |S| ≥ n/2
                          v(S) =
                                    0 otherwise.
 This game has an empty core by the following argument. Assume that
                                                       P
 x is in the core. If |S| = n − 1 then v(S) = 1 so that i∈S xi ≥ 1. Since
                                                   P            P
 there are n coalitions of size n − 1 we thus have {S:|S|=n−1} i∈S xi ≥
 n. On the other hand
        X       X         X          X             X
                     xi =                     xi =    (n − 1)xi = n − 1,
    {S:|S|=n−1} i∈S       i∈N {S:|S|=n−1, S3i}      i∈N

 a contradiction.
? Exercise 260.4 (Convex games)       A coalitional game with transferable
 payoff hN, vi is convex if

                      v(S) + v(T ) ≤ v(S ∪ T ) + v(S ∩ T )

 for all coalitions S and T , where v(∅) = 0. Let h{1, . . . , n}, vi be such a
  13.2 The Core                                                            261



  game and define the payoff profile x by xi = v(Si ∪ {i}) − v(Si ) for each
  i ∈ N , where Si = {1, . . . , i − 1} (with S1 = ∅). Show that x is in the
  core of h{1, . . . , n}, vi.
? Exercise 261.1 (Simple games)     A coalitional game with transferable
  payoff hN, vi is simple if v(S) is either 0 or 1 for every coalition S,
  and v(N ) = 1; a coalition S for which v(S) = 1 is called a winning
  coalition. A player who belongs to all winning coalitions is a veto
  player.
   a. Show that if there is no veto player then the core is empty.
   b. Show that if the set of veto players is nonempty then the core is
      the set of all nonnegative feasible payoff profiles that give zero to all
      other players.
? Exercise 261.2 (Zerosum games)       A coalitional game with transferable
  payoff hN, vi is zerosum if v(S)+v(N \S) = v(N ) for every coalition S;
  it is additive if v(S) + v(T ) = v(S ∪ T ) for all disjoint coalitions S and
  T . Show that a zerosum game that is not additive has an empty core.
     We remarked earlier that when modeling as a coalitional game a sit-
  uation in which the actions of any coalition affect its complement there
  may be several ways to define v(S), each entailing a different interpreta-
  tion. The next exercise asks you to define v(S) to be the highest payoff
  that S can guarantee independently of the behavior of N \ S.
? Exercise 261.3 (Pollute the lake) Each of n factories draws water from
  a lake and discharges waste into the same lake. Each factory requires
  pure water. It costs any factory kc to purify its water supply, where k is
  the number of factories that do not treat their waste before discharging
  it into the lake; it costs any factory b to treat its waste. Assume that
  c ≤ b ≤ nc.
   a. Model this situation as a coalitional game under the assumption
      that the worth v(S) of any coalition S is the highest payoff that
      S can guarantee (that is, v(S) is the highest payoff of S under the
      assumption that none of the other factories treats its waste).
   b. Find the conditions under which the game has a nonempty core and
      the conditions under which the core is a singleton.
   c. Discuss the interpretation of the core of this game, taking into ac-
      count that the definition of v(S) makes assumptions about the be-
      havior of the players outside S.
262                                                 Chapter 13. The Core



13.3   Nonemptiness of the Core

We now derive a condition under which the core of a coalitional game
is nonempty. Since the core is defined by a system of linear inequalities
such a condition could be derived from the conditions for the existence of
a solution to a general system of inequalities. However, since the system
of inequalities that defines the core has a special structure we are able
to derive a more specific condition.
   Denote by C the set of all coalitions, for any coalition S denote by RS
the |S|-dimensional Euclidian space in which the dimensions are indexed
by the members of S, and denote by 1S ∈ RN the characteristic vector
of S given by
                                      1 if i ∈ S
                                   n
                          (1S )i =
                                      0 otherwise.
A collection (λS )S∈C of numbers in [0, 1] is a balanced collection of
weights if for every player i the sum of λS over all the coalitions that
                 P
contain i is 1:    S∈C λS 1S = 1N . As an example, let |N | = 3. Then
the collection (λS ) in which λS = 12 if |S| = 2 and λS = 0 otherwise is
a balanced collection of weights; so too is the collection (λS ) in which
λS = 1 if |S| = 1 and λS = 0 otherwise. A game hN, vi is balanced if
P
   S∈C λS v(S) ≤ v(N ) for every balanced collection of weights.
   One interpretation of the notion of a balanced game is the following.
Each player has one unit of time, which he must distribute among all the
coalitions of which he is a member. In order for a coalition S to be active
for the fraction of time λS , all its members must be active in S for this
fraction of time, in which case the coalition yields the payoff λS v(S).
In this interpretation the condition that the collection of weights be
balanced is a feasibility condition on the players’ allocation of time, and
a game is balanced if there is no feasible allocation of time that yields
the players more than v(N ).
   The following result is referred to as the Bondareva–Shapley theorem.
Proposition 262.1 A coalitional game with transferable payoff has a
nonempty core if and only if it is balanced.
Proof. Let hN, vi be a coalitional game with transferable payoff. First let
x be a payoff profile in the core of hN, vi and let (λS )S∈C be a balanced
collection of weights. Then
       X              X              X X              X
           λS v(S) ≤      λS x(S) =      xi    λS =       xi = v(N ),
       S∈C           S∈C            i∈N    S3i      i∈N

so that hN, vi is balanced.
 13.4 Markets with Transferable Payoff                                          263



    Now assume that hN, vi is balanced. Then there is no balanced collec-
                                       P
 tion (λS )S∈C of weights for which S∈C λS v(S) > v(N ). Therefore the
 convex set {(1N , v(N ) + ) ∈ R|N |+1 :  > 0} is disjoint from the convex
 cone
                         X
      {y ∈ R|N |+1 : y =    λS (1S , v(S)) where λS ≥ 0 for all S ∈ C},
                              S∈C
                         P
 since if not then 1N = S∈C λS 1S , so that (λS )S∈C is a balanced col-
                         P
 lection of weights and S∈C λS v(S) > v(N ). Thus by the separating
 hyperplane theorem (see, for example, Rockafeller (1970, Theorem 11.3))
 there is a nonzero vector (αN , α) ∈ R|N | × R such that

                  (αN , α) · y ≥ 0 > (αN , α) · (1N , v(N ) + )             (263.1)

 for all y in the cone and all  > 0. Since (1N , v(N )) is in the cone, we
 have α < 0.
   Now let x = αN /(−α). Since (1S , v(S)) is in the cone for all S ∈ C,
 we have x(S) = x · 1S ≥ v(S) for all S ∈ C by the left-hand inequality in
 (263.1), and v(N ) ≥ 1N x = x(N ) from the right-hand inequality. Thus
 v(N ) = x(N ), so that the payoff profile x is in the core of hN, vi.    2
? Exercise 263.2         Let N = {1, 2, 3, 4}. Show that the game hN, vi in
 which
                          1    if S = N
                      (
             v(S) =       3
                          4    if S = {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {1, 4}, or {2, 3, 4}
                          0    otherwise
 has an empty core, by using the fact that there exists a balanced collec-
 tion (λS )S∈C of weights in which λS = 0 for all coalitions S that are not
 equal to {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {1, 4}, or {2, 3, 4}.

 13.4     Markets with Transferable Payoff

 13.4.1     Definition
 In this section we apply the concept of the core to a classical model of an
 economy. Each of the agents in the economy is endowed with a bundle
 of goods that can be used as inputs in a production process that the
 agent can operate. All production processes produce the same output,
 which can be transferred between the agents. Formally, a market with
 transferable payoff consists of
    •   a finite set N (the set of agents)
264                                                  Chapter 13. The Core


  •   a positive integer ` (the number of input goods)
  •   for each agent i ∈ N a vector ωi ∈ R`+ (the endowment of agent i)
  •   for each agent i ∈ N a continuous, nondecreasing, and concave
      function fi : R`+ → R+ (the production function of agent i).
An input vector is a member of R`+ ; a profile (zi )i∈N of input vectors
           P           P
for which i∈N zi = i∈N ωi is an allocation.
  In such a market the agents may gain by cooperating: if their endow-
ments are complementary then in order to maximize total output they
may need to exchange inputs. However, the agents’ interests conflict as
far as the distribution of the benefits of cooperation is concerned. Thus
a game-theoretic analysis is called for.
  We can model a market with transferable payoff hN, `, (ωi ), (fi )i as a
coalitional game with transferable payoff hN, vi in which N is the set of
agents and for each coalition S we have
                   (                                        )
                     X                         X      X
    v(S) = max          fi (zi ): zi ∈ R`+ and   zi =     ωi .     (264.1)
            (zi )i∈S
                       i∈S                    i∈S     i∈S

That is, v(S) is the maximal total output that the members of S can
produce by themselves. We define the core of a market to be the core
of the associated coalitional game.
   Note that our assumptions that all agents produce the same good and
the production of any coalition S is independent of the behavior of N \S
are essential.

13.4.2   Nonemptiness of the Core
We now use the Bondareva–Shapley theorem (262.1) to show that every
market with transferable payoff has a nonempty core.
Proposition 264.2 Every market with transferable payoff has a non-
empty core.
Proof. Let hN, `, (ωi ), (fi )i be a market with transferable payoff and let
hN, vi be the coalitional game defined in (264.1). By the Bondareva–
Shapley theorem it suffices to show that hN, vi is balanced. Let (λS )S∈C
                                                           P
be a balanced collection of weights. We must show that S∈C λS v(S) ≤
v(N ). For each coalition S let (ziS )i∈S be a solution of the problem
(264.1) defining v(S). For each i ∈ N let zi∗ = S∈C,S3i λS ziS . We have
                                                   P

      X        X X                      XX             X      X
         zi∗ =                 λS ziS =       λS ziS =    λS     ziS =
      i∈N       i∈N S∈C,S3i         S∈C i∈S          S∈C     i∈S
 13.4 Markets with Transferable Payoff                                                 265


                X          X            X           X               X
                      λS         ωi =         ωi             λS =         ωi ,
                S∈C        i∈S          i∈N        S∈C,S3i          i∈N

 where the last equality follows from the fact that (λS )S∈C is a balanced
 collection of weights. It follows from the definition of v(N ) that v(N ) ≥
              ∗
 P
   i∈N fi (zi ); the concavity of each function fi and the fact that the
 collection of weights is balanced implies that
   X               X X                      X    X               X
       fi (zi∗ ) ≥           λS fi (ziS ) =   λS     fi (ziS ) =   λS v(S),
   i∈N          i∈N S∈C,S3i                         S∈C      i∈S                 S∈C

 completing the proof.                                                                  2
 Example 265.1 Consider the market with transferable payoff in which
  N = K ∪ M , there are two input goods (` = 2), ωi = (1, 0) if i ∈ K,
  ωi = (0, 1) if i ∈ M , and fi (a, b) = min{a, b} for every i ∈ N . Then
  v(S) = min{|K∩S|, |M ∩S|}. By Proposition 264.2 the core is nonempty.
  If |K| < |M | then it consists of a single point, in which each agent in
  K receives the payoff of 1 and each agent in M receive the payoff of 0;
  the proof is identical to that for the market with an indivisible good in
  Example 260.1.
? Exercise 265.2   Consider the market with transferable payoff like that
 of the previous example in which there are five agents, ω1 = ω2 = (2, 0),
 and ω3 = ω4 = ω5 = (0, 1).
  a. Find the coalitional form of this market and calculate the core.
  b. Suppose that agents 3, 4, and 5 form a syndicate: they enter coali-
     tions only as a block, so that we have a three-player game. Does the
     core predict that the formation of the syndicate benefits its members?
     Interpret your answer.

 13.4.3   The Core and the Competitive Equilibria
 Classical economic theory defines the solution of “competitive equilib-
 rium” for a market. We now show that the core of a market contains its
 competitive equilibria.
    We begin with the simple case in which all agents have the same pro-
 duction function f and there is only one input. Let ω ∗ = i∈N ωi /|N |,
                                                               P

 the average endowment. Given the concavity of f , the allocation in
 which each agent receives the amount ω ∗ of the input maximizes the
 total output. Let p∗ be the slope of a tangent to the production func-
 tion at ω ∗ and let g be the affine function with slope p∗ for which
 g(ω ∗ ) = f (ω ∗ ) (see Figure 266.1). Then (g(ωi ))i∈N is in the core since
266                                                        Chapter 13. The Core


                                                 g(z)
                                                   
                                                
                                               
                                              f (z)
                                          
                                     
                             
                           
                    
                  


                  0                   ω∗                   z→

Figure 266.1 The production function f of each agent and the function g in a
market in which there is a single input.

                  P                         P                 P
v(S) = |S|f (( i∈S ωi )/|S|) ≤ |S|g(( i∈S ωi )/|S|) =               g(ωi ) and
                                                               Pi∈S
v(N ) = |N |f (( i∈N ωi )/|N |) = |N |f (ω ∗ ) = |N |g(ω ∗ ) = i∈N g(ωi ).
                   P

   The payoff profile (g(ωi ))i∈N can be achieved by each agent trading
input for output at the price p∗ (each unit of input costs p∗ units of
output): if trade at this price is possible then agent i maximizes his
payoff by choosing the amount z of input to solve maxz (f (z)−p∗ (z−ωi )),
the solution of which is ω ∗ . In terms of the next definition, the pair
(p∗ , (zi∗ )i∈N ) where zi∗ = ω ∗ for all i ∈ N is a competitive equilibrium
of the market.
   We define a competitive equilibrium of a market with transferable
payoff as a pair (p∗ , (zi∗ )i∈N ) consisting of a vector p∗ ∈ R`+ (the vector
of input prices) and an allocation (zi∗ )i∈N such that for each agent i the
vector zi∗ solves the problem
                         max (fi (zi ) − p∗ (zi − ωi )).                (266.1)
                        zi ∈R`+

If (p∗ , (zi∗ )i∈N ) is a competitive equilibrium then we refer to fi (zi∗ ) −
p∗ (zi∗ − ωi ), the value of the maximum in (266.1), as a competitive
payoff of agent i. The idea is that the agents can trade inputs at fixed
prices, which are expressed in terms of units of output. If after buying
and selling inputs agent i holds the bundle zi then his net expenditure,
in units of output, is p∗ (zi − ωi ); he can produce fi (zi ) units of output,
so that his net payoff is fi (zi ) − p∗ (zi − ωi ). A price vector p∗ generates
a competitive equilibrium if, when each agent chooses his trades to max-
imize his payoff, the resulting profile (zi∗ )i∈N of input vectors is feasible
in the sense that it is an allocation.
 13.4 Markets with Transferable Payoff                                      267



   We now show that any profile of competitive payoffs in a market with
 transferable payoff is in the core.
 Proposition 267.1 Every profile of competitive payoffs in a market
 with transferable payoff is in the core of the market.
 Proof. Let hN, `, (ωi ), (fi )i be a market with transferable payoff, let
 hN, vi be the associated coalitional game, let (p∗ , (zi∗ )i∈N ) be a com-
 petitive equilibrium of the market, and assume contrary to the result
 that the profile of associated competitive payoffs is not in the core.
                                                                     P
 Then there is a coalition S and a vector (zi )i∈S such that i∈S zi =
        ω and i∈S fi (zi ) > i∈S (fi (zi∗ ) − p∗ zi∗ + p∗ ωi ). It follows that
 P                P              P
 Pi∈S i              ∗
                             P            ∗      ∗ ∗
    i∈S (fi (zi ) − p zi ) >   i∈S (fi (zi ) − p zi ) and hence for at least one
 agent i ∈ S we have fi (zi ) − p zi > fi (zi∗ ) − p∗ zi∗ , contradicting the
                                        ∗

 fact that zi∗ is a solution of (266.1). Finally, v(N ) = i∈N fi (zi∗ ) since
                                                             P
                                P              P                 P
 for any (zi )i∈N such that i∈N zi = i∈N ωi we have i∈N fi (zi ) ≤
               ∗      ∗ ∗    ∗                     ∗
                                                                              2
 P                                   P
    i∈N (fi (zi ) − p zi + p ωi ) =       i∈N fi (zi ).

   Proposition 267.1 provides an alternative route to show that the core
 of a market with transferable payoff is nonempty, since every market
 with transferable payoff has a competitive equilibrium, as the following
 exercise shows.
? Exercise 267.2    Let hN, `, (ωi ), (fi )i be a market with transferable pay-
                                        P
 off in which every component of i∈N ωi is positive, let Xi = {(zi , yi ) ∈
 R`+ × R: yi ≤ fi (zi )} for each i ∈ N , and let {zi∗ }i∈N be a solution of
                       (                                        )
                         X                        X       X
               max           fi (zi ): subject to    zi ≤     ωi .
             {zi }i∈N
                        i∈N                    i∈N       i∈N
                                                             P
 Show that the coefficients of the hyperplane that separates    i∈N Xi
 from {(z, y) ∈ R` × R: z ≤ i∈N zi∗ and y ≥ i∈N fi (zi∗ )} define com-
                            P                P

 petitive prices.
    The notion of competitive equilibrium is intended to capture a world
 in which the bargaining power of each agent is small. In a market that
 contains only a few agents some may have strong bargaining positions,
 and the core may contain outcomes very different from the competitive
 equilibrium. However, in a large market, where each agent’s action has
 only a small effect on the outcome, we might expect the core to contain
 only outcomes that are similar to the competitive equilibrium. The
 following exercise illustrates this idea in a special case; in Section 13.6.2
 we study the idea in a more general context.
  268                                                     Chapter 13. The Core



? Exercise 268.1 (A production economy)          Let hN, `, (ωi ), (fi )i be a mar-
  ket with transferable payoff in which N = {1, . . . , k + 1}, ` = 2, ω1 =
  (1, 0), ωi = (0, 1) for i 6= 1, and fi = f for all i ∈ N , with f (0, m) = 0 for
  all m, f (1, 0) = 0, and limm→∞ f (1, m) < ∞. Suppose that the input
  goods are indivisible. The associated coalitional game is the same as
  that in Exercise 259.3. Show that for all  > 0 there is an integer k ∗ ()
  such that for all k > k ∗ () no member of the core gives player 1 a payoff
  less than f (1, k) − . Give an economic interpretation of this result.

  13.5     Coalitional Games without Transferable Payoff

  In a coalitional game with transferable payoff each coalition S is char-
  acterized by a single number v(S), with the interpretation that v(S) is
  a payoff that may be distributed in any way among the members of S.
  We now study a more general concept, in which each coalition cannot
  necessarily achieve all distributions of some fixed payoff; rather, each
  coalition S is characterized by an arbitrary set V (S) of consequences.
I Definition 268.2 A coalitional game (without transferable payoff)
  consists of
    •   a finite set N (the set of players)
    •   a set X (the set of consequences)
    •   a function V that assigns to every nonempty subset S of N (a
        coalition) a set V (S) ⊆ X
    •   for each player i ∈ N a preference relation %i on X.
  Any coalitional game with transferable payoff hN, vi (Definition 257.1)
  can be associated with a general coalitional game hN, X, V, (%i )i∈N i as
  follows: X = RN , V (S) = {x ∈ RN : i∈S xi = v(S) and xj = 0 if j ∈
                                          P

  N \ S} for each coalition S, and x %i y if and only if xi ≥ yi . Under
  this association the set of coalitional games with transferable payoff is a
  subset of the set of all coalitional games.
     The definition of the core of a general coalitional game is a natural
  extension of our definition for the core of a game with transferable payoff
  (Definition 258.2).
I Definition 268.3 The core of the coalitional game hN, V, X,
  (%i )i∈N i is the set of all x ∈ V (N ) for which there is no coalition S
  and y ∈ V (S) for which y i x for all i ∈ S.
    Under conditions like that of balancedness for a coalitional game with
  transferable payoff (see Section 13.3) the core of a general coalitional
13.6 Exchange Economies                                                  269



game is nonempty (see Scarf (1967), Billera (1970), and Shapley (1973)).
We do not discuss these conditions here.

13.6     Exchange Economies

13.6.1    Definitions
A generalization of the notion of a market with transferable payoff is the
following. An exchange economy consists of
  •   a finite set N (the set of agents)
  •   a positive integer ` (the number of goods)
  •   for each agent i ∈ N a vector ωi ∈ R`+ (the endowment of agent i)
                                    P
      such that every component of i∈N ωi is positive
  •   for each agent i ∈ N a nondecreasing, continuous, and quasi-concave
      preference relation %i over the set R`+ of bundles of goods.
The interpretation is that ωi is the bundle of goods that agent i owns
                                                      P
initially. The requirement that every component of i∈N ωi be positive
means that there is a positive quantity of every good available in the
economy. Goods may be transferred between the agents, but there is no
payoff that is freely transferable.
   An allocation is a distribution of the total endowment in the economy
among the agents: that is, a profile (xi )i∈N with xi ∈ R`+ for all i ∈ N
     P           P
and i∈N xi = i∈N ωi . A competitive equilibrium of an exchange
economy is a pair (p∗ , (x∗i )i∈N ) consisting of a vector p∗ ∈ R`+ with
p∗ 6= 0 (the price vector) and an allocation (x∗i )i∈N such that for each
agent i we have p∗ x∗i ≤ p∗ ωi and

                x∗i %i xi for any xi for which p∗ xi ≤ p∗ ωi .       (269.1)

If (p∗ , (x∗i )i∈N ) is a competitive equilibrium then (x∗i )i∈N is a compet-
itive allocation.
   As in the case of a competitive equilibrium of a market with transfer-
able payoff, the idea is that the agents can trade goods at fixed prices.
Here there is no homogeneous output in terms of which the prices are
expressed; rather, we can think of p∗j as the “money” price of good j.
Given any price vector p, each agent i chooses a bundle that is most
desirable (according to his preferences) among all those that are afford-
able (i.e. satisfy pxi ≤ pωi ). Typically an agent chooses a bundle that
contains more of some goods and less of others than he initially owns: he
“demands” some goods and “supplies” others. The requirement in the
270                                                           Chapter 13. The Core



                                                                                 O2




   HH
                                             00
                                          ry
     HH
             H
              HH
                      H
                          HHx∗
                            Hr
                        r
                               H
                                 HH
                    y 0            H                 I1
                                             HH
                                                H rω
                                                 HH      I0
                                                      H 1
                                                 I20
                                                        H
                                             I2           HH
                                                                      HH
   O1

Figure 270.1 An Edgeworth box, illustrating an exchange economy in which there
are two agents and two goods. A competitive equilibrium price ratio is given by
the slope of the line through ω and x∗ ; x∗ corresponds to a competitive allocation.
The core is the set of all allocations that correspond to points on the line joining y 0
and y 00 .


definition of competitive equilibrium that the profile of chosen bundles
be an allocation means that for every good the sum of the individuals’
demands is equal to the sum of their supplies.
   A standard result in economic theory is that an exchange economy in
which every agent’s preference relation is increasing has a competitive
equilibrium (see, for example, Arrow and Hahn (1971, Theorem 5 on
p. 119)1 ). Note that an economy may possess many such equilibria.
   An exchange economy that contains two agents (|N | = 2) and two
goods (` = 2) can be conveniently represented in a diagram like that in
Figure 270.1, which is known as an Edgeworth box. Bundles of goods
consumed by agent 1 are measured from the origin O1 in the bottom
left, while bundles consumed by agent 2 are measured from the origin
O2 in the top right. The width of the box formed by the two pairs of
axes is the total endowment of good 1 in the economy and the height
   1 Arrow and Hahn’s result is for the more general notion of an economy with

production. To apply it here, let the production set of each firm f be Yf = {0}.
Note that if every agent’s preference relation is increasing then every agent is resource
related (in the sense of Arrow and Hahn) to every other agent.
13.6 Exchange Economies                                                    271



of the box is the total endowment of good 2. Thus each point x in the
box corresponds to an allocation in which agent i receives the bundle
x measured from Oi ; the point labeled ω corresponds to the pair of
endowments. The curved lines labeled Ii and Ii0 are indifference curves
of agent i: if x and y are points on one of these curves then x ∼i y.
The straight line passing through ω and x∗ is (relative to Oi ) the set
of all bundles xi for which pxi = pωi . The point x∗ corresponds to a
competitive allocation since the most preferred bundle of agent i in the
set {xi : pxi ≤ pωi } is x∗ when measured from origin Oi . The ratio of
the competitive prices is the negative of the slope of the straight line
through ω and x∗ .
   An exchange economy is closely related to a market (as defined in
Section 13.4). In a market, payoff can be directly transferred between
agents, while in an exchange economy only goods can be directly trans-
ferred. Thus we model an exchange economy as a coalitional game with-
out transferable payoff. Precisely, we associate the exchange economy
hN, `, (ωi ), (%i )i with the coalitional game hN, X, V, (%i )i where
  • X = {(xi )i∈N : xi ∈ R`+ for all i ∈ N };
                             P           P
  • V (S) = {(x )
                i i∈N ∈ X:     i∈S xi =     i∈S ωi and xj = ωj for all j ∈
    N \ S} for each coalition S;
  •   each preference relation %i is defined by (xj )j∈N %i (yj )j∈N if and
      only if xi %i yi .
The third condition expresses the assumption that each agent cares only
about his own consumption. We define the core of an exchange
economy to be the core of the associated coalitional game.

13.6.2   The Core and the Competitive Equilibria
For the coalitional game hN, X, V, (%i )i associated with the exchange
economy hN, `, (ωi ), (%i )i the set V (N ) is the set of all allocations and
for each j ∈ N we have V ({j}) = {(ωi )i∈N }. Thus the core of a two-
agent economy is the set of all allocations (xi )i∈N such that xj %j ωj for
each agent j and there is no allocation (x0i )i∈N such that x0j j xj for
both agents j. For example, in the Edgeworth box in Figure 270.1 the
core corresponds to the locus of points in the area bounded by I10 and
I20 for which an indifference curve of agent 1 and an indifference curve
of agent 2 share a common tangent (i.e. it is the curved line passing
through y 0 , x∗ , and y 00 ). In particular, the core contains the competitive
allocation. We now show that this is a general property.
272                                                   Chapter 13. The Core



Proposition 272.1 Every competitive allocation in an exchange econ-
omy is in the core.
Proof. Let E = hN, `, (ωi ), (%i )i be an exchange economy, let (p∗ ,
(x∗i )i∈N ) be a competitive equilibrium of E, and assume that (x∗i )i∈N
is not in the core of E. Then there is a coalition S and (yi )i∈S with
                                          ∗
P              P
   i∈S yi =      i∈S ωi such that yi i xi for allPi ∈ S; usingP(269.1)
we have p yi > p ωi for all i ∈ S. Hence p∗ i∈S yi > p∗ i∈S ωi ,
             ∗       ∗

                                                                       2
                P          P
contradicting i∈S yi = i∈S ωi .
   Note that it follows from this result that an economy that has a
competitive equilibrium has a nonempty core.
   By examining an Edgeworth box we can see that in a two-good two-
agent economy the core may be large. However, we now show that as
the number of agents increases, the core shrinks to the set of competitive
allocations. That is, in a large enough economy the predictions of the
competitive equilibrium—a concept that is based on agents who trade at
fixed prices—are very close to those of the core—a concept that is based
on the ability of a group of agents to improve its lot by forming an au-
tonomous subeconomy, without reference to prices. Put differently, in a
large enough economy the only outcomes that are immune to deviations
by groups of agents are competitive equilibrium allocations.
   To state the result precisely, let E be an exchange economy in which
there are n agents. For any positive integer k let kE be the economy
derived from E in which there are kn agents—k copies of each agent in
E. We refer to an agent j in kE who is a copy of agent i in E as being
of type i = ι(j). The comparison between the core of E and that of kE
is facilitated by the following result.
Lemma 272.2 (Equal treatment in the core) Let E be an exchange
economy in which the preference relation of every agent is increasing and
strictly quasi-concave, and let k be a positive integer. In any allocation
in the core of kE all agents of the same type obtain the same bundle.
Proof. Let E = hN, `, (ωi ), (%i )i and let x be an allocation in the core
of kE in which there are two agents of type t∗ whose bundles are differ-
ent. We now show that there is a distribution of the endowment of the
coalition consisting of the worst-off agent of each type that makes every
member of the coalition better off than he is in x. Precisely, for each
type t select one agent, it , in kE who is least well off (according to %t )
in x among all agents of type t, and let S be the coalition (of size |N |) of
these agents. For each type t let zt be the average bundle of the agents
13.6 Exchange Economies                                                     273


                                      P
of type t in the allocation x: zt =       {j:ι(j)=t} xj /k. Then we have
     P           P
       t∈N zt =     t∈N ωt ;
   •


  •   zt %t xit (otherwise, zt ≺t xj whenever ι(j) = t, so that by the
      quasi-concavity of %t we have zt ≺t zt , a contradiction);
  •   zt∗ t∗ xit∗ (by the strict quasi-concavity of the preference rela-
      tions).
That is, (i ) it is feasible for the coalition S to assign to each agent j ∈ S
                           P              P           P
the bundle zι(j) (since j∈S zι(j) = t∈N zt = j∈S ωj ), (ii ) for every
agent j ∈ S the bundle zι(j) is at least as desirable as xj , and (iii ) for
the agent j ∈ S of type t∗ the bundle zι(j) is preferable to xj .
   Since each agent’s preference relation is increasing we can modify the
allocation (zt )t∈N by reducing t∗ ’s bundle by a small amount and dis-
tributing this amount equally among the other members of S so that we
have a profile (zt0 )t∈N with t∈N zt0 = t∈N ωt and zι(j)    0
                                P            P
                                                                ι(j) xj for all
j ∈ S. This contradicts the fact that x is in the core of kE.                 2
   Given this result, for any positive integer k we can identify the core
of kE with a profile of |N | bundles, one for each type. Under this
identification it is clear that the core of kE is a subset of the core of
E. We now show that the core of kE shrinks to the set of competitive
allocations of E as k increases.
Proposition 273.1 Let E be an exchange economy in which every
agent’s preference relation is increasing and strictly quasi-concave and
every agent’s endowment of every good is positive. Let x be an allocation
in E. If for every positive integer k the allocation in kE in which every
agent of each type t receives the bundle xt is in the core of kE then x
is a competitive allocation of E.
Proof. Let E = hN, `, (ωi ), (%i )i. Let
        (                                                          )
           X          X
   Q=         αt zt :   αt = 1, αt ≥ 0, and zt + ωt t xt for all t .
            t∈N       t∈N

Under our assumptions on preferences Q is convex. We claim that 0 ∈ / Q.
                                   P
Suppose to the contrary that 0 = t∈N αt zt for some (αt ) and (zt ) with
P
   t∈N αt = 1, αt ≥ 0, and zt + ωt t xt for all t. Suppose that every
αt is a rational number. (If not, we need to do some approximation.)
Choose an integer K large enough that Kαt is an integer for all t, let
S be a coalition in KE that consists of Kαt agents of each type t, and
let x0i = zι(i) + ωi for each i ∈ S. We have i∈S x0i = t∈N Kαt zt +
                                            P          P
 274                                                 Chapter 13. The Core


                           0
 P             P
    i∈S ωi =   i∈S ωi and xi i xi for all i ∈ S, contradicting the fact
 that x is in the core of KE.
    Now by the separating hyperplane theorem (see, for example, Rock-
 afeller (1970, Theorem 11.3)) there is a nonzero vector p ∈ R` such that
 pz ≥ 0 if z ∈ Q. Since all the agents’ preferences are increasing, each
 unit vector is in Q (take zt = xt − ωt + 1{m} and αt = 1/|N | for each t,
 where 1{m} is the mth unit vector in R` ). Thus p ≥ 0.
    Now, for every agent i we have xi − ωi +  ∈ Q for every  > 0, so that
 p(xi − ωi + ) ≥ 0. Taking  small, we conclude that pxi ≥ pωi for all i.
 But x is an allocation, so pxi = pωi for all i.
    Finally, we argue that if yi i xi for some i ∈ N then pyi > pωi ,
 so that by (269.1) x is a competitive allocation of E. Suppose that
 yi i xi . Then yi − ωi ∈ Q, so that by the choice of p we have pyi ≥ pωi .
 Furthermore, θyi i xi for some θ < 1, so that θyi − ωi ∈ Q and hence
 θpyi ≥ pωi ; also pwi > 0 since every component of ωi is positive. Thus
 pyi > pωi .                                                             2
   In any competitive equilibrium of kE all agents of the same type
 consume the same bundle, so that any such equilibrium is naturally
 associated with a competitive equilibrium of E. Thus the result shows
 a sense in which the larger k is, the closer are the core and the set of
 competitive allocations of kE.
? Exercise 274.1    Consider an exchange economy E in which there are
 two goods and two agents; agent 1’s endowment is (1, 0) and her pref-
 erences are represented by the utility function x1 + x2 , while agent 2’s
 endowment is (0, 1) and his preferences are represented by the utility
 function min{x1 , x2 }. For each positive integer k find the core and set
 of competitive allocations of kE.

 Notes

 The notion of a coalitional game is due to von Neumann and Morgen-
 stern (1944). In the early 1950s Gillies introduced the notion of the core
 as a tool to study stable sets (his work is published in Gillies (1959));
 Shapley and Shubik developed it as a solution concept. Proposition 262.1
 is due to Bondareva (1963) and Shapley (1967). The idea of model-
 ing markets as coalitional games is due to von Neumann and Morgen-
 stern (1944, pp. 583–584); it was developed by Shapley and Shubik (see,
 for example, Shapley (1959) and Shubik (1959a)). Proposition 264.2 is
 due to Shapley and Shubik (1969a). The idea of generalizing a coali-
Notes                                                              275



tional game to situations in which payoff is not transferable is due to
Shapley and Shubik (1953) and Luce and Raiffa (1957, pp. 234–235);
the formulation that we describe is due to Aumann and Peleg (1960).
Scarf (1967), Billera (1970), and Shapley (1973) discuss the nonempti-
ness of the core of a coalitional game without transferable payoff. The
relation between the core and the set of competitive equilibria of an
economy was first noticed by Edgeworth (1881, pp. 35–39). The re-
lation between Edgeworth’s work and modern notions in game theory
was recognized by Shubik (1959a). Proposition 273.1 is due to Debreu
and Scarf (1963); for a diagrammatic proof for a two-agent two-good
economy see Varian (1992, pp. 387–392).
   Example 259.2 is due to Shapley (inspired by the 1948 movie The
Treasure of the Sierra Madre). The game in Exercise 259.3 is analyzed
by Shapley and Shubik (1967). The market in Example 260.1 is studied
by Shapley (1959). Exercise 260.4 is taken from Shapley (1971/72),
Exercise 261.3 from Shapley and Shubik (1969b), Exercise 265.2 from
Postlewaite and Rosenthal (1974), and Exercise 268.1 from Owen (1982,
Theorem IX.3.2).
   Aumann (1989) contains an introduction to the theory of coalitional
games. Other references include Owen (1982), Shubik (1982), Moulin
(1986, 1988), Friedman (1990), and Myerson (1991).
   Aumann (1964) provides an alternative formulation of Edgeworth’s
idea that the core converges to the set of competitive equilibria in a
large economy: he studies a model in which there is a continuum of
agents and shows that the core coincides with the set of competitive
equilibria. Axiomatizations of the core are surveyed by Peleg (1992).
14         Stable Sets, the Bargaining Set, and the
           Shapley Value




In contrast to the core, the solution concepts we study in this chapter
restrict the way that an objecting coalition may deviate, by requiring
that each possible deviation either itself be a stable outcome or be bal-
anced by a counterdeviation. These restrictions yield several solutions:
stable sets, the bargaining set, the kernel, the nucleolus, and the Shapley
value.

14.1   Two Approaches

The definition of the core does not restrict a coalition’s credible devia-
tions, beyond imposing a feasibility constraint. In particular it assumes
that any deviation is the end of the story and ignores the fact that a devi-
ation may trigger a reaction that leads to a different final outcome. The
solution concepts we study in this chapter consider various restrictions
on deviations that are motivated by these considerations.
   In the first approach we study (in Section 14.2), an objection by a
coalition to an outcome consists of an alternative outcome that is itself
constrained to be stable. The idea is that a deviation by a coalition will
lead via some sequence of events to a stable outcome and that a coalition
should choose to deviate on the basis of the ultimate effect of its action,
not the proximate effect. This stability condition is self-referential: a
stable outcome has the property that no coalition can achieve some other
stable outcome that improves the lot of all its members.
   In the second approach (studied in Sections 14.3 and 14.4) the chain
of events that a deviation unleashes is cut short after two stages: the
stability condition is that for every objection to an outcome there is a
balancing counterobjection. Different notions of objection and counter-
objection give rise to a number of different solution concepts.
278             Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value



  The arguments captured by the solution concepts in this chapter are
attractive. Nevertheless, it is our impression that there are few per-
suasive applications of the concepts. Consequently we simply describe
the concepts, discuss their interpretations, and give simple examples.
Throughout we restrict attention to coalitional games with transferable
payoff.

14.2    The Stable Sets of von Neumann and Morgenstern

The idea behind the first solution concept we study is that a coalition S
that is unsatisfied with the current division of v(N ) can credibly ob-
ject by suggesting a stable division x of v(N ) that is better for all the
members of S and is backed up by a threat to implement (xi )i∈S on
its own (by dividing the worth v(S) among its members). The logic
behind the requirement that an objection itself be stable is that other-
wise the objection may unleash a process involving further objections by
other coalitions, at the end of which some of members of the deviating
coalition may be worse off.
   This idea leads to a definition in which a set of stable outcomes satisfies
two conditions: (i ) for every outcome that is not stable some coalition
has a credible objection and (ii ) no coalition has a credible objection
to any stable outcome. Note that this definition is self-referential and
admits the possibility that there be many stable sets.
   We now turn to the formal definition. Let hN, vi be a coalitional
game with transferable payoff. As in the previous chapter we assume
that hN, vi is cohesive (see Definition 258.1). An imputation of hN, vi
is a feasible payoff profile x for which xi ≥ v({i}) for all i ∈ N ; let X
be the set of all imputations of hN, vi. We first define objections (which
are not necessarily credible).
  •   An imputation x is an objection of the coalition S to the im-
      putation y if xi > yi for all i ∈ S and x(S) ≤ v(S), in which case
      we write x S y.
(In the literature it is sometimes said that “x dominates y via S” if x is
an objection of S to y.) Since hN, vi is cohesive we have x S y if and
only if there is an S-feasible payoff vector (xi )i∈S for which xi > yi for all
i ∈ S. The core of the game hN, vi is the set of all imputations to which
there is no objection: {y ∈ X: there is no coalition S and imputation
x for which x S y}. The solution concept we now study is defined as
follows.
  14.2 The Stable Sets of von Neumann and Morgenstern                    279



I Definition 279.1 A subset Y of the set X of imputations of a coali-
  tional game with transferable payoff hN, vi is a stable set if it satisfies
  the following two conditions.
  Internal stability If y ∈ Y then for no z ∈ Y does there exist a coali-
     tion S for which z S y.
  External stability If z ∈ X \ Y then there exists y ∈ Y such that y S z
     for some coalition S.
     This definition can be written alternatively as follows. For any set Y
  of imputations let D(Y ) be the set of imputations z for which there is
  a coalition S and an imputation y ∈ Y such that y S z. Then internal
  and external stability are equivalent to the conditions Y ⊆ X \ D(Y )
  and Y ⊇ X \ D(Y ), so that a set Y of imputations is a stable set if and
  only if Y = X \ D(Y ).
     While the core is a single set of imputations, a game may have more
  than one stable set (see the examples below) or none at all (as shown
  by the complex example in Lucas (1969)); each such set may contain
  many imputations. Von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944) interpret
  each stable set as corresponding to a standard of behavior, the idea
  being that all the imputations in any given stable set correspond to some
  mode of behavior while imputations in different stable sets correspond
  to different modes of behavior.
     Some simple properties of stable sets are given in the following result.
  Proposition 279.2 a. The core is a subset of every stable set. b. No
  stable set is a proper subset of any other. c. If the core is a stable set
  then it is the only stable set.
  Proof. a. Every member of the core is an imputation and no member is
  dominated by an imputation, so the result follows from external stability.
  b. This follows from external stability. c. This follows from (a) and (b).2
 Example 279.3 (The three-player majority game) Consider the game
  h{1, 2, 3}, vi in which v(S) = 1 if |S| ≥ 2 and v(S) = 0 otherwise. One
  stable set of this game is
                Y = {(1/2, 1/2, 0), (1/2, 0, 1/2), (0, 1/2, 1/2)}.
  This corresponds to the “standard of behavior” in which some pair of
  players shares equally the single unit of payoff that is available. The
  internal stability of Y follows from the fact that for all x and y in Y
  only one player prefers x to y. To check external stability, let z be an
  imputation outside Y . Then there are two players i and j for whom
  280             Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value



  zi < 12 and zj < 21 , so that there is an imputation in Y that is an
  objection of {i, j} to z.
    For any c ∈ [0, 12 ) and any i ∈ {1, 2, 3} the set
                             Yi,c = {x ∈ X: xi = c}
  is also a stable set of the game. This corresponds to a “standard of
  behavior” in which one of the players is singled out and given a fixed
  payoff. The internal stability of Yi,c follows from the fact that for any
  x and y in the set there is only one player who prefers x to y. To show
  the external stability of Yi,c let i = 3 and let z be an imputation outside
  Y3,c . If z3 > c then z1 + z2 < 1 − c and there exists x ∈ Y3,c such that
  x1 > z1 and x2 > z2 , so that x {1,2} z. If z3 < c and, say, z1 ≤ z2 then
  (1 − c, 0, c) {1,3} z.
? Exercise 280.1 (Simple games)     Let hN, vi be a simple game (see Ex-
  ercise 261.1). Let T be a minimal winning coalition (a winning coali-
  tion that has no strict subset that is winning). Show that the set of
  imputations that assign 0 to all players not in T is a stable set.
? Exercise 280.2 (A market for an indivisible good )    For the market
  described in Example 260.1 with |B| ≥ |L| show that the set
                 Y = {x ∈ X: xi = xj if i, j ∈ L or i, j ∈ B},
  is a stable set; interpret it.
? Exercise 280.3 (Three-player games) For a three-player game the set of
  imputations can be represented geometrically as an equilateral triangle
  with height v(N ) in which each point represents the imputation whose
  components are the distances to each edge. (Thus the corners correspond
  to the three imputations that assign v(N ) to a single player.) Use such a
  diagram to find the general form of a stable set of the three-player game
  in which v({1, 2}) = β < 1, v({1, 3}) = v({1, 2, 3}) = 1, and v(S) = 0
  otherwise. We can interpret this game as a market in which player 1 is
  a seller and players 2 and 3 are buyers with reservation values β and 1
  respectively. Interpret the stable sets of the game in terms of this market.
? Exercise 280.4     Player i is a dummy in hN, vi if v(S ∪ {i}) − v(S) =
  v({i}) for every coalition S of which i is not a member. Show that if
  player i is a dummy in hN, vi then his payoff in any imputation in any
  stable set is v({i}).
? Exercise 280.5     Let X be an arbitrary set (of outcomes) and let D
  be a binary relation on X, with the interpretation that if x D y then
14.3 The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus                             281



x is an objection of some coalition S to y. Generalize the definition of
stable sets as follows. The set Y ⊆ X of outcomes is stable if it satisfies
the following two conditions.
Internal stability If y ∈ Y then there exists no z ∈ Y such that z D y.
External stability If z ∈ X \ Y then there exists y ∈ Y such that y D z.
Consider an exchange economy (see Section 13.6) in which there are two
goods and two agents. Let X be the set of all allocations x for which
xi %i ωi for each agent i. Define the relation D by x D y if both agents
prefer x to y. Show that the only (generalized) stable set is the core of
the economy.

14.3     The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus

We now turn to the second approach that we described at the start
of the chapter. That is, we regard an objection by a coalition to be
convincing if no other coalition has a “balancing” counterobjection; we
do not require the objection or counterobjection to be themselves stable
in any sense. We study three solution concepts that differ in the nature
of the objections and counterobjections.

14.3.1    The Bargaining Set
Let x be an imputation in a coalitional game with transferable payoff
hN, vi. Define objections and counterobjections as follows.
  •   A pair (y, S), where S is a coalition and y is an S-feasible payoff
      vector, is an objection of i against j to x if S includes i but not
      j and yk > xk for all k ∈ S.
  •   A pair (z, T ), where T is a coalition and z is a T -feasible payoff vec-
      tor, is a counterobjection to the objection (y, S) of i against
      j if T includes j but not i, zk ≥ xk for all k ∈ T \ S, and zk ≥ yk
      for all k ∈ T ∩ S.
  Such an objection is an argument by one player against another. An
objection of i against j to x specifies a coalition S that includes i but
not j and a division y of v(S) that is preferred by all members of S to
x. A counterobjection to (y, S) by j specifies an alternative coalition T
that contains j but not i and a division of v(T ) that is at least as good
as y for all the members of T who are also in S and is at least as good
as x for the other members of T . The solution concept that we study is
defined as follows.
  282             Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value



I Definition 282.1 The bargaining set of a coalitional game with
  transferable payoff is the set of all imputations x with the property
  that for every objection (y, S) of any player i against any other player j
  to x there is a counterobjection to (y, S) by j.
     The bargaining set models the stable arrangements in a society in
  which any argument that any player i makes against an imputation x
  takes the following form: “I get too little in the imputation x and j gets
  too much; I can form a coalition that excludes j in which everybody
  is better off than in x”. Such an argument is ineffective as far as the
  bargaining set is concerned if player j can respond as follows: “Your
  demand is not justified; I can form a coalition that excludes you in
  which everybody is at least as well off as they are in x and the players
  who participate in your coalition obtain at least what you offer them.”
     The bargaining set, like the other solution concepts in this section,
  assumes that the argument underlying an objection for which there is
  no counterobjection undermines the stability of an outcome. This fact
  is taken as given, and is not derived from more primitive assumptions
  about the players’ behavior. The appropriateness of the solution in a
  particular situation thus depends on the extent to which the participants
  in that situation regard the existence of an objection for which there is
  no counterobjection as a reason to change the outcome.
     Note that an imputation is in the core if and only if no player has
  an objection against any other player; hence the core is a subset of the
  bargaining set. We show later (in Corollary 288.3) that the bargaining
  set of every game is nonempty.
 Example 282.2 (The three-player majority game) Consider the three-
  player majority game. The core of this game is empty (see Exam-
  ple 259.1) and the game has many stable sets (see Example 279.3). The
  bargaining set of the game is the singleton {( 31 , 31 , 13 )}, by the following
  argument. Let x be an imputation and suppose that (y, S) is an objec-
  tion of i against j to x. Then we must have S = {i, h}, where h is the
  third player and yh < 1 − xi (since yi > xi and y(S) = v(S) = 1). For j
  to have a counterobjection to (y, S) we need yh + xj ≤ 1. Thus for x to
  be in the bargaining set we require that for all players i, j, and h we have
  yh ≤ 1 − xj whenever yh < 1 − xi , which implies that 1 − xi ≤ 1 − xj or
  xj ≤ xi for all i and j, so that x = ( 31 , 13 , 13 ). Obviously this imputation
  is in the bargaining set.
 Example 282.3 (My aunt and I ) Let h{1, 2, 3, 4}, vi be a simple game
  (see Exercise 261.1) in which v(S) = 1 if and only if S contains one of
  14.3 The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus                        283



  the coalitions {2, 3, 4} or {1, i} for i ∈ {2, 3, 4}. (Player 2 is “I” and
  player 1 is his aunt.) In this game, player 1 appears to be in a stronger
  position than the other players since she needs the cooperation of only
  one player to form a winning coalition. If x is an imputation for which
  x2 < x3 then player 2 has an objection against 3 (via {1, 2}) to x for
  which there is no counterobjection. Thus if x is in the bargaining set
  then x2 = x3 = x4 = α, say. Any objection of player 1 against player 2
  to x takes the form (y, {1, j}) where j = 3 or 4 and yj < 3α; there
  is no counterobjection if and only if α + 3α + α > 1, or α > 51 . An
  objection of player 2 against 1 to x must use the coalition {2, 3, 4} and
  give one of the players 3 or 4 less than (1 − α)/2; player 1 does not have
  a counterobjection if and only if 1 − 3α + (1 − α)/2 > 1, or α < 71 .
  Hence the bargaining set is {(1 − 3α, α, α, α): 17 ≤ α ≤ 15 }. (Note that
  by contrast the core is empty.)
     We saw (Example 265.1) that the competition inherent in the core
  can drive to zero the payoff of players holding goods that are in excess
  supply. The following exercise gives an example that shows how this
  intense competition is muted in the bargaining set.
? Exercise 283.1 (A market) Consider the coalitional game derived from
  the market with transferable payoff in Exercise 265.2. Show that the
  bargaining set of this game is {(α, α, β, β, β): 0 ≤ α ≤ 23 and 2α + 3β =
  3}. Contrast this set with the core and give an interpretation.

  14.3.2   The Kernel
  We now describe another solution that, like the bargaining set, is de-
  fined by the condition that to every objection there is a counterobjec-
  tion; it differs from the bargaining set in the nature of objections and
  counterobjections that are considered effective.
     Let x be an imputation in a coalitional game with transferable payoff
  hN, vi; for any coalition S call e(S, x) = v(S) − x(S) the excess of S. If
  the excess of the coalition S is positive then it measures the amount that
  S has to forgo in order for the imputation x to be implemented; it is the
  sacrifice that S makes to maintain the social order. If the excess of S
  is negative then its absolute value measures the amount over and above
  the worth of S that S obtains when the imputation x is implemented;
  it is S’s surplus in the social order.
     A player i objects to an imputation x by forming a coalition S that
  excludes some player j for whom xj > v({j}) and pointing out that
  284             Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value



  he is dissatisfied with the sacrifice or gain of this coalition. Player j
  counterobjects by pointing to the existence of a coalition that contains j
  but not i and sacrifices more (if e(S, x) > 0) or gains less (if e(S, x) < 0).
  More precisely, define objections and counterobjections as follows.
    •   A coalition S is an objection of i against j to x if S includes i
        but not j and xj > v({j}).
    •   A coalition T is counterobjection to the objection S of i against
        j if T includes j but not i and e(T, x) ≥ e(S, x).
I Definition 284.1 The kernel of a coalitional game with transferable
  payoff is the set of all imputations x with the property that for every
  objection S of any player i against any other player j to x there is a
  counterobjection of j to S.
    For any two players i and j and any imputation x define sij (x) to be
  the maximum excess of any coalition that contains i but not j:

                 sij (x) = max{e(S, x): i ∈ S and j ∈ N \ S}.
                           S∈C

  Then we can alternatively define the kernel to be the set of imputations
  x ∈ X such that for every pair (i, j) of players either sji (x) ≥ sij (x) or
  xj = v({j}).
     The kernel models the stable arrangements in a society in which a
  player makes arguments of the following type against an imputation x:
  “Here is a coalition to which I belong that excludes player j and sacrifices
  too much (or gains too little)”. Such an argument is ineffective as far as
  the kernel is concerned if player j can respond by saying “your demand
  is not justified; I can name a coalition to which I belong that excludes
  you and sacrifices even more (or gains even less) than the coalition that
  you name”.
     Note that the definitions of the core and the bargaining set do not re-
  quire us to compare the payoffs of different players, while that of the
  kernel does. Thus the definitions of the former concepts can easily
  be extended to a general coalitional game hN, X, V, (%i )i (see Defini-
  tion 268.2). For example, as we saw in Section 13.5, the core is the set
  of all x ∈ V (N ) for which there is no coalition S and y ∈ V (S) for which
  y i x for all i ∈ S. By contrast, the definition of the kernel cannot be
  so extended; it assumes that there is meaning to the statement that the
  excess of one coalition is larger than that of another. Thus the kernel is
  an appropriate solution concept only in situations in which the payoffs
  of different players can be meaningfully compared.
  14.3 The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus                              285



     We show later that the kernel is nonempty (see Corollary 288.3). Its
  relation with the bargaining set is as follows.
  Lemma 285.1 The kernel of a coalitional game with transferable payoff
  is a subset of the bargaining set.
  Proof. Let hN, vi be a coalitional game with transferable payoff, let x
  be an imputation in the kernel, and let (y, S) be an objection in the
  sense of the bargaining set of player i against j to x: i ∈ S, j ∈ N \ S,
  y(S) = v(S), and yk > xk for all k ∈ S. If xj = v({j}) then (z, {j}) with
  zj = v({j}) is a counterobjection to (y, S). If xj > v({j}) then since x is
  in the kernel we have sji (x) ≥ sij (x) ≥ v(S) − x(S) = y(S) − x(S). Let
  T be a coalition that contains j but not i for which sji (x) = v(T )−x(T ).
  Then v(T ) − x(T ) ≥ y(S) − x(S), so that v(T ) ≥ y(S ∩ T ) + y(S \ T ) +
  x(T \S)−x(S \T ) > y(S ∩T )+x(T \S), since y(S \T ) > x(S \T ). Thus
  there exists a T -feasible payoff vector z with zk ≥ xk for all k ∈ T \ S
  and zk ≥ yk for all k ∈ T ∩ S, so that (z, T ) is a counterobjection to
  (y, S).                                                                  2
 Example 285.2 (The three-player majority game) It follows from our
  calculation of the bargaining set (Example 282.2), the previous lemma
  (285.1), and the nonemptiness of the kernel that the kernel of the three-
  player majority game is {( 31 , 13 , 31 )}. To see this directly, assume that
  x1 ≥ x2 ≥ x3 , with at least one strict inequality. Then s31 (x) = 1 −
  x2 − x3 > 1 − x2 − x1 = s13 (x) and x1 > 0 = v({1}), so that x is not in
  the kernel.
 Example 285.3 (My aunt and I ) The kernel of the game in Exam-
  ple 282.3 is {( 25 , 15 , 15 , 15 )}, by the following argument. Let x be in the
  kernel. By Lemma 285.1 and the calculation of the bargaining set of
  the game we have x = (1 − 3α, α, α, α) for some 17 ≤ α ≤ 15 , so
  that s12 (x) = 2α and s21 (x) = 1 − 3α. Since 1 − 3α > 0 we need
  s12 (x) = 2α ≥ s21 (x) = 1 − 3α, or α ≥ 15 ; hence α = 51 .


  14.3.3   The Nucleolus

  A solution that is closely related to the kernel is the nucleolus. Let x
  be an imputation in a coalitional game with transferable payoff. Define
  objections and counterobjections as follows.
    •   A pair (S, y) consisting of a coalition S and an imputation y is an
        objection to x if e(S, x) > e(S, y) (i.e. y(S) > x(S)).
  286             Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value


    •   A coalition T is a counterobjection to the objection (S, y) if
        e(T, y) > e(T, x) (i.e. x(T ) > y(T )) and e(T, y) ≥ e(S, x).
I Definition 286.1 The nucleolus of a coalitional game with transfer-
  able payoff is the set of all imputations x with the property that for
  every objection (S, y) to x there is a counterobjection to (S, y).
     As for the kernel the idea is that the excess of S is a measure of S’s
  dissatisfaction with x: it is the price that S pays to tolerate x rather
  than secede from N . In the definition of the kernel an objection is made
  by a single player, while here an objection is made by a coalition. An
  objection (S, y) may be interpreted as a statement by S of the form “our
  excess is too large in x; we suggest the alternative imputation y in which
  it is smaller”. The nucleolus models situations in which such objections
  cause outcomes to be unstable only if no coalition T can respond by
  saying “your demand is not justified since our excess under y is larger
  than it was under x and furthermore exceeds under y what yours was
  under x”. Put differently, an imputation fails to be stable according to
  the nucleolus if the excess of some coalition S can be reduced without
  increasing the excess of some coalition to a level at least as large as that
  of the original excess of S.
     This definition of the nucleolus, which is not standard, facilitates a
  comparison with the kernel and the bargaining set and is easier to
  interpret than the standard definition, to which we now show it is
  equivalent.
     For any imputation x let S1 , . . . , S2|N | −1 be an ordering of the coali-
  tions for which e(S` , x) ≥ e(S`+1 , x) for ` = 1, . . . , 2|N | − 2 and let
  E(x) be the vector of excesses defined by E` (x) = e(S` , x) for all ` =
  1, . . . , 2|N | − 1. Let B1 (x), . . . , BK (x) be the partition of the set of
  all coalitions in which S and S 0 are in the same cell if and only if
  e(S, x) = e(S 0 , x). For any S ∈ Bk (x) let e(S, x) = ek (x), so that
  e1 (x) > e2 (x) > · · · > eK (x).
     We say that E(x) is lexicographically less than E(y) if E` (x) < E` (y)
  for the smallest ` for which E` (x) 6= E` (y), or equivalently if there exists
  k ∗ such that for all k < k ∗ we have |Bk (x)| = |Bk (y)| and ek (x) = ek (y),
  and either (i ) ek∗ (x) < ek∗ (y) or (ii ) ek∗ (x) = ek∗ (y) and |Bk∗ (x)| <
  |Bk∗ (y)|.
  Lemma 286.2 The nucleolus of a coalitional game with transferable pay-
  off is the set of imputations x for which the vector E(x) is lexicograph-
  ically minimal.
14.3 The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus                             287



Proof. Let hN, vi be a coalitional game with transferable payoff and
let x be an imputation for which E(x) is lexicographically minimal. To
show that x is in the nucleolus, suppose that (S, y) is an objection to
x, so that e(S, y) < e(S, x). Let k ∗ be the maximal value of k such
that ek (x) = ek (y) and Bk (x) = Bk (y) (not just |Bk (x)| = |Bk (y)|)
for all k < k ∗ . Since E(y) is not lexicographically less than E(x) we
have either (i ) ek∗ (y) > ek∗ (x) or (ii ) ek∗ (x) = ek∗ (y) and |Bk∗ (x)| ≤
|Bk∗ (y)|. In either case there is a coalition T ∈ Bk∗ (y) with ek∗ (y) =
e(T, y) > e(T, x). We now argue that e(T, y) ≥ e(S, x), so that T
is a counterobjection to (S, y). Since e(S, y) < e(S, x) we have S ∈          /
   ∗
     −1
∪kk=1   Bk (x) and hence ek∗ (x) ≥ e(S, x); since ek∗ (y) ≥ ek∗ (x) we have
e(T, y) ≥ e(S, x).
   Now assume that x is in the nucleolus and that E(y) is lexicographi-
cally less than E(x). Let k ∗ be the smallest value of k for which Bk (x) =
Bk (y) for all k < k ∗ and either (i ) ek∗ (y) < ek∗ (x) or (ii ) ek∗ (y) =
ek∗ (x) and Bk∗ (y) 6= Bk∗ (x) (and hence |Bk∗ (y)| 6= |Bk∗ (x)|). In either
case there exists a coalition S ∈ Bk∗ (x) for which e(S, y) < e(S, x).
Let λ ∈ (0, 1) and let z(λ) = λx + (1 − λ)y; we have e(R, z(λ)) =
λe(R, x) + (1 − λ)e(R, y) for any coalition R. We claim that the pair
(S, z(λ)) is an objection to x for which there is no counterobjection. It
is an objection since e(S, z(λ)) < e(S, x). For T to be a counterobjec-
tion we need both e(T, z(λ)) > e(T, x) and e(T, z(λ)) ≥ e(S, x). How-
ever, if e(T, z(λ)) > e(T, x) then e(T, y) > e(T, x), which implies that
         ∗                                                          ∗
                                                                      −1
T ∈/ ∪kk=1 Bk (x) and hence e(S, x) > e(T, x). Also, since T ∈ / ∪kk=1   Bk (y)
we have e(S, x) = ek∗ (x) ≥ ek∗ (y) ≥ e(T, y). Thus e(S, x) > e(T, z(λ)).
We conclude that there is no counterobjection to (S, z(λ)).                  2
  The nucleolus is related to the kernel as follows.
Lemma 287.1 The nucleolus of a coalitional game with transferable
payoff is a subset of the kernel.
Proof. Let hN, vi be a coalitional game with transferable payoff and let
x be an imputation that is not in the kernel of hN, vi. We show that
x is not in the nucleolus of hN, vi. Since x is not in the kernel there
are players i and j for which sij (x) > sji (x) and xj > v({j}). Since
xj > v({j}) there exists  > 0 such that y = x + 1{i} − 1{j} is an
imputation (where 1{k} is the kth unit vector); choose  small enough
that sij (y) > sji (y). Note that e(S, x) < e(S, y) if and only if S contains
i but not j and e(S, x) > e(S, y) if and only if S contains j but not i. Let
k ∗ be the minimal value of k for which there is a coalition S ∈ Bk∗ (x)
with e(S, x) 6= e(S, y). Since sij (x) > sji (x) the set Bk∗ (x) contains
288             Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value



at least one coalition that contains i but not j and no coalition that
contains j but not i. Further, for all k < k ∗ we have Bk (y) = Bk (x) and
ek (y) = ek (x). Now, if Bk∗ (x) contains coalitions that contain both i and
j or neither of them then ek∗ (y) = ek∗ (x) and Bk∗ (y) is a strict subset
of Bk∗ (x). If not, then since sij (y) > sji (y) we have ek∗ (y) < ek∗ (x). In
both cases E(y) is lexicographically less than E(x) and hence x is not
in the nucleolus of hN, vi.                                                 2
  We now show that the nucleolus of any game is nonempty.
Proposition 288.1 The nucleolus of any coalitional game with trans-
ferable payoff is nonempty.
Proof. First we argue that for each value of k the function Ek is
continuous. This follows from the fact that for any k we have
                      Ek (x) = min      max e(S, x),                  (288.2)
                               T ∈C k−1 S∈C\T

where C 0 = {∅} and C k for k ≥ 1 is the set of all collections of k
coalitions. Since E1 is continuous the set X1 = arg minx∈X E1 (x) is
nonempty and compact. Now, for each integer k ≥ 1 define Xk+1 =
arg minx∈Xk Ek+1 (x). By induction every such set is nonempty and
compact; since X2|N | −1 is the nucleolus the proof is complete.   2
  This result immediately implies that the bargaining set and kernel of
any game are nonempty.
Corollary 288.3 The bargaining set and kernel of any coalitional
game with transferable payoff are nonempty.
Proof. This follows from the nonemptiness of the nucleolus (Propo-
sition 288.1) and the facts that the nucleolus is a subset of the ker-
nel (Lemma 287.1) and the kernel is a subset of the bargaining set
(Lemma 285.1).                                                      2
  As we have seen above the bargaining set of a game may contain many
imputations; the same is true of the kernel. However, the nucleolus is
always a singleton, as the following result shows.
Proposition 288.4 The nucleolus of any coalitional game with trans-
ferable payoff is a singleton.
Proof. Let hN, vi be a coalitional game with transferable payoff. Suppose
that the imputations x and y are both in the nucleolus, so that E(x) =
E(y). We show that for any coalition S we have e(S, x) = e(S, y) and
hence, in particular, for any player i we have e({i}, x) = e({i}, y), so
 14.4 The Shapley Value                                                    289



 that x = y. Assume there is at least one coalition S ∗ with e(S ∗ , x) 6=
 e(S ∗ , y) and consider the imputation z = 21 (x + y). Since Ek (x) = Ek (y)
 for all k we have ek (x) = ek (y) and |Bk (x)| = |Bk (y)| for all k. But
 since e(S ∗ , x) 6= e(S ∗ , y) there exists a minimal value k ∗ of k for which
 Bk∗ (x) 6= Bk∗ (y). Now, if Bk∗ (x) ∩ Bk∗ (y) 6= ∅ then Bk∗ (z) = Bk∗ (x) ∩
 Bk∗ (y) ⊂ Bk∗ (x); if Bk∗ (x)∩Bk∗ (y) = ∅ then ek∗ (z) < ek∗ (x) = ek∗ (y).
 In both cases E(z) is lexicographically less than E(x), contradicting the
 fact that x is in the nucleolus.                                             2
? Exercise 289.1 (A production economy)      Show that the single impu-
 tation in the nucleolus of the game in Exercise 259.3, which models a
 production economy with one capitalist and w workers, gives each worker
 1
 2 [f (w) − f (w − 1)]. (Note that since the nucleolus is a singleton you
 need only to verify that the imputation is in the nucleolus.)
? Exercise 289.2 (Weighted majority games)          A weighted majority
 game is a simple game hN, vi in which
                                  
                                    1 if w(S) ≥ q
                         v(S) =
                                    0 otherwise,
                           N
                                             P
 for some q ∈ R and w ∈ R+ , where w(S) = i∈S wi for any coalition S.
 An interpretation is that wi is the number of votes that player i has and
 q is the number of votes needed to win (the quota). A weighted majority
 game is homogeneous if w(S) = q for any minimal winning coalition S
 and is zerosum if for each coalition S either v(S) = 1 or v(N \ S) = 1,
 but not both. Consider a zerosum homogeneous weighted majority game
 hN, vi in which wi = 0 for every player i who does not belong to any
 minimal winning coalition. Show that the nucleolus of hN, vi consists of
 the imputation x defined by xi = wi /w(N ) for all i ∈ N .

 14.4     The Shapley Value

 The last solution concept that we study in this chapter is the Shap-
 ley value. Following our approach in the previous section we begin by
 characterizing this solution in terms of objections and counterobjections.
 Then we turn to the standard (axiomatic) characterization.

 14.4.1   A Definition in Terms of Objections and Counterobjections
 The solution concepts for coalitional games that we have studied so far
 are defined with reference to single games in isolation. By contrast,
 the Shapley value of a given game is defined with reference to other
290              Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value



games. It is an example of a value—a function that assigns a unique
feasible payoff profile to every coalitional game with transferable payoff,
a payoff profile being feasible if the sum of its components is v(N ). (The
requirement that the payoff profile assigned by the value be feasible is
sometimes called efficiency.)
   Our first presentation of the Shapley value, like our presentations
of the solutions studied in the previous section, is in terms of certain
types of objections and counterobjections. To define these objections
and counterobjections, let hN, vi be a coalitional game with transferable
payoff and for each coalition S define the subgame hS, v S i of hN, vi to be
the coalitional game with transferable payoff in which v S (T ) = v(T ) for
any T ⊆ S. Let ψ be a value. An objection of player i against player j
to the division x of v(N ) may take one of the following two forms.
  •   “Give me more since otherwise I will leave the game, causing you
      to obtain only ψj (N \ {i}, v N \{i} ) rather than the larger payoff xj ,
      so that you will lose the positive amount xj − ψj (N \ {i}, v N \{i} ).”
  •   “Give me more since otherwise I will persuade the other players to
      exclude you from the game, causing me to obtain ψi (N \{j}, v N \{j} )
      rather than the smaller payoff xi , so that I will gain the positive
      amount ψi (N \ {j}, v N \{j} ) − xi .”
A counterobjection by player j to an objection of the first type is an
assertion
  •   “It is true that if you leave then I will lose, but if I leave then
      you will lose at least as much: xi − ψi (N \ {j}, v N \{j} ) ≥ xj −
      ψj (N \ {i}, v N \{i} ).”
A counterobjection by player j to an objection of the second type is an
assertion
  •   “It is true that if you exclude me then you will gain, but if I exclude
      you then I will gain at least as much: ψj (N \ {i}, v N \{i} ) − xj ≥
      ψi (N \ {j}, v N \{j} ) − xi .”
The Shapley value is required to satisfy the property that for every objec-
tion of any player i against any other player j there is a counterobjection
of player j.
   These objections and counterobjections differ from those used to de-
fine the bargaining set, kernel, and nucleolus in that they refer to the
outcomes of smaller games. It is assumed that these outcomes are de-
rived from the same logic as the payoff of the game itself: that is, the
  14.4 The Shapley Value                                                          291



  outcomes of the smaller games, like the outcome of the game itself, are
  given by the value. In this respect the definition of a value shares features
  with that of stable sets.
    The requirement that a value assign to every game a payoff profile with
  the property that every objection is balanced by a counterobjection is
  equivalent to the following condition.
I Definition 291.1 A value ψ satisfies the balanced contributions
  property if for every coalitional game with transferable payoff hN, vi
  we have
      ψi (N, v) − ψi (N \ {j}, v N \{j} ) = ψj (N, v) − ψj (N \ {i}, v N \{i} )
  whenever i ∈ N and j ∈ N .
     We now show that the unique value that satisfies this property is the
  Shapley value, defined as follows. First define the marginal contribution
  of player i to any coalition S with i ∈
                                        / S in the game hN, vi to be
                          ∆i (S) = v(S ∪ {i}) − v(S).
I Definition 291.2 The Shapley value ϕ is defined by the condition
                         1 X
            ϕi (N, v) =       ∆i (Si (R)) for each i ∈ N,
                        |N |!
                                  R∈R

  where R is the set of all |N |! orderings of N and Si (R) is the set of
  players preceding i in the ordering R.
     We can interpret the Shapley value as follows. Suppose that all the
  players are arranged in some order, all orders being equally likely. Then
  ϕi (N, v) is the expected marginal contribution over all orders of player i
  to the set of players who precede him. Note that the sum of the marginal
  contributions of all players in any ordering is v(N ), so that the Shapley
  value is indeed a value.
  Proposition 291.3 The unique value that satisfies the balanced con-
  tributions property is the Shapley value.
  Proof. First we show that there is at most one value that satisfies the
  property. Let ψ and ψ 0 be any two values that satisfy the condition. We
  prove by induction on the number of players that ψ and ψ 0 are identical.
  Suppose that they are identical for all games with less than n players
  and let hN, vi be a game with n players. Since ψi (N \ {j}, v N \{j} ) =
  ψi0 (N \ {j}, v N \{j} ) for any i, j ∈ N , we deduce from the balanced
  contributions property that ψi (N, v) − ψi0 (N, v) = ψj (N, v) − ψj0 (N, v)
292                Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value



for all i, j ∈ N . Now fixing i and summing over j ∈ N , using the
fact that j∈N ψj (N, v) = j∈N ψj0 (N, v) = v(N ), we conclude that
           P                     P

ψi (N, v) = ψi0 (N, v) for all i ∈ N .
   We now verify that the Shapley value ϕ satisfies the balanced contribu-
tions property. Fix a game hN, vi. We show that ϕi (N, v) − ϕj (N, v) =
ϕi (N \ {j}, v N \{j} ) − ϕj (N \ {i}, v N \{i} ) for all i, j ∈ N . The left-hand
side of this equation is
        X
                 αS [∆i (S) − ∆j (S)] + βS [∆i (S ∪ {j}) − ∆j (S ∪ {i})],
      S⊆N \{i,j}

where αS = |S|!(|N | − |S| − 1)!/|N |! and βS = (|S| + 1)!(|N | − |S| −
2)!/|N |!, while the right-hand side is
                          X
                                γS [∆i (S) − ∆j (S)],
                         S⊆N \{i,j}

where γS = |S|!(|N | − |S| − 2)!/(|N | − 1)!. The result follows from the
facts that ∆i (S)−∆j (S) = ∆i (S ∪{j})−∆j (S ∪{i}) and αS +βS = γS .2
   Note that the balanced contributions property links a game only with
its subgames. Thus in the derivation of the Shapley value of a game
hN, vi we could restrict attention to the subgames of hN, vi, rather than
work with the set of all possible games.

14.4.2    An Axiomatic Characterization
We now turn to an axiomatic characterization of the Shapley value. The
derivation, unlike that in the previous section, restricts attention to the
set of games with a given set of players. Throughout we fix this set to
be N and denote a game simply by its worth function v.
  To state the axioms we need the following definitions. Player i is a
dummy in v if ∆i (S) = v({i}) for every coalition S that excludes i.
Players i and j are interchangeable in v if ∆i (S) = ∆j (S) for every
coalition S that contains neither i nor j (or, equivalently, v((S \ {i}) ∪
{j}) = v(S) for every coalition S that includes i but not j). The axioms
are the following.
SYM (Symmetry) If i and j are interchangeable in v then ψi (v) = ψj (v).
DUM (Dummy player ) If i is a dummy in v then ψi (v) = v({i}).
ADD (Additivity) For any two games v and w we have ψi (v + w) =
   ψi (v) + ψi (w) for all i ∈ N , where v + w is the game defined by
   (v + w)(S) = v(S) + w(S) for every coalition S.
14.4 The Shapley Value                                                  293



  Note that the first two axioms impose conditions on single games,
while the last axiom links the outcomes of different games. This last
axiom is mathematically convenient but hard to motivate: the structure
of v + w may induce behavior that is unrelated to that induced by v
or w separately. Luce and Raiffa (1957, p. 248) write that the axiom
“strikes us as a flaw in the concept of value”; for a less negative view see
Myerson (1991, p. 437–438).
Proposition 293.1 The Shapley value is the only value that satisfies
SYM, DUM, and ADD.
Proof. We first verify that the Shapley value satisfies the axioms.
   SYM: Assume that i and j are interchangeable. For every ordering
R ∈ R let R0 ∈ R differ from R only in that the positions of i and j are
interchanged. If i precedes j in R then we have ∆i (Si (R)) = ∆j (Sj (R0 )).
If j precedes i then ∆i (Si (R)) − ∆j (Sj (R0 )) = v(S ∪ {i}) − v(S ∪ {j}),
where S = Si (R) \ {j}. Since i and j are interchangeable we have
v(S ∪ {i}) = v(S ∪ {j}), so that ∆i (Si (R)) = ∆j (Sj (R0 )) in this case
too. It follows that ϕ satisfies SYM.
   DUM: It is immediate that ϕ satisfies this condition.
   ADD: This follows from the fact that if u = v + w then
      u(S ∪ {i}) − u(S) = v(S ∪ {i}) − v(S) + w(S ∪ {i}) − w(S).
  We now show that the Shapley value is the only value that satisfies the
axioms. Let ψ be a value that satisfies the axioms. For any coalition S
define the game vS by
                                  1 if T ⊇ S
                                n
                      vS (T ) =
                                  0 otherwise.
Regard a game v as a collection of 2|N | −1 numbers (v(S))S∈C . We begin
by showing that for any game v there is a unique collection (αT )T ∈C of
                              P
real numbers such that v = T ∈C αT vT . That is, we show that (vT )T ∈C
is an algebraic basis for the space of games. Since the collection (vT )T ∈C
of games contains 2|N | − 1 members it suffices to show that these games
                                            P
are linearly independent. Suppose that        S∈C βS vS = 0; we need to
show that βS = 0 for all S. Suppose to the contrary that there exists
some coalition T with βT 6= 0. Then we can choose such a coalition T
                                                P
for which βS = 0 for all S ⊂ T , in which case S∈C βS vS (T ) = βT 6= 0,
a contradiction.
   Now, by SYM and DUM the value of any game αvT for α ≥ 0 is
given uniquely by ψi (αvT ) = α/|T | if i ∈ T and ψi (αvT ) = 0 otherwise.
                                                P
We complete the proof by noting that if v = T ∈C αT vT then we have
  294              Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value


       P                     P
  v = {T ∈C:αT >0} αT vT − {T ∈C:αT <0} (−αT vT ) so that by ADD the
  value of v is determined uniquely.                              2
 Example 294.1 (Weighted majority games) Consider the weighted ma-
  jority game v (see Exercise 289.2) with weights w = (1, 1, 1, 2) and
  quota q = 3. In all orderings in which player 4 is first or last his
  marginal contribution is 0; in all other orderings his marginal con-
  tribution is 1. Thus ϕ(v) = ( 16 , 61 , 16 , 12 ). Note that we have v =
  v{1,4} + v{2,4} + v{3,4} + v{1,2,3} − v{1,2,4} − v{1,3,4} − v{2,3,4} , from which
  we can alternatively deduce ϕ4 (v) = 3 · 21 + 0 − 3 · 31 = 12 .
? Exercise 294.2     Show the following results, which establish that if any
  one of the three axioms SYM, DUM, and ADD is dropped then there
  is a value different from the Shapley value that satisfies the remaining
  two.
   a. For any game v and any i ∈ N let ψi (v) be the average marginal
      contribution of player i over all the (|N | − 1)! orderings of N in
      which player 1 is first. Then ψ satisfies DUM and ADD but not
      SYM.
   b. For any game v let ψi (v) = v(N )/|N |. Then ψ satisfies SYM and
      ADD but not DUM.
   c. For any game v let D(v) be the set of dummies in v and let
               (                                   
                      1              P
                              v(N ) − j∈D(v) v({j})    if i ∈ N \ D(v)
       ψi (v) = |N \ D(v)|
                 v({i})                                if i ∈ D(v).
        Then ψ satisfies SYM and DUM but not ADD.
 Example 294.3 Consider the game h{1, 2, 3}, vi in which v(1, 2, 3) =
  v(1, 2) = v(1, 3) = 1 and v(S) = 0 otherwise. (This game can be in-
  terpreted as a model of a market in which there is a seller (player 1)
  who holds one unit of a good that she does not value and two poten-
  tial buyers (players 2 and 3) who each value the good as worth one
  unit of payoff.) There are six possible orderings of the players. In the
  four in which player 1 is second or third her marginal contribution is
  1 and the marginal contributions of the other two players are 0; in the
  ordering (1, 2, 3) player 2’s marginal contribution is 1, and in (1, 3, 2)
  player 3’s marginal contribution is 1. Thus the Shapley value of the
  game is ( 23 , 61 , 16 ). By contrast, the core of the game consists of the
  single payoff profile (1, 0, 0).
 Example 294.4 (A market) Consider the market for an indivisible good
  in Example 260.1, in which there are b buyers and ` sellers, with ` < b.
 14.4 The Shapley Value                                                    295



 Consider replications of the market in which there are kb buyers and k`
 sellers for some positive integer k. If k is very large then in most random
 orderings of the players the fraction of buyers in the set of players who
 precede any given player i is close to b/` > 1. In any such ordering the
 marginal contribution of player i is 1 if she is a seller, so that the Shapley
 value payoff of a seller is close to 1 (and that of a buyer is close to 0).
 Precisely, it can be shown that the limit as k → ∞ of the Shapley value
 payoff of a seller is 1. This is the simplest example of a more general
 result due to Aumann (1975) that the Shapley value converges to the
 profile of competitive payoffs as the size of the market increases.
? Exercise 295.1       Find the core and the Shapley value of the game
 h{1, 2, 3, 4}, vi in which v({1, 2, 3, 4}) = 3, v(S) = 0 if S includes at
 most one of the players in {1, 2, 3}, and v(S) = 2 otherwise. Explain the
 source of the difference between the two solutions.
? Exercise 295.2 (A production economy)   Find the Shapley value of the
 game in Exercise 259.3 and contrast it with the core and the nucleolus
 (see Exercise 289.1).
 Example 295.3 (A majority game) Consider a parliament in which
  there is one party with m−1 seats and m parties each with one seat, and
  a majority is decisive (a generalization of My aunt and I ). This situation
  can be modeled as a weighted majority game (see Exercise 289.2) in
  which N = {1, . . . , m+1}, w1 = m−1, wi = 1 for i 6= 1, and q = m. The
  marginal contribution of the large party is 1 in all but the 2m! orderings
  in which it is first or last. Hence the Shapley value of the game assigns
  to the large party the payoff [(m+1)!−2m!]/(m+1)! = (m−1)/(m+1).
? Exercise 295.4   Consider a parliament in which there are n parties;
 two of them have 13 of the seats each and the other n − 2 share the
 remaining seats equally. Model this situation as a weighted majority
 game (see Exercise 289.2).
  a. Show that the limit as n → ∞ of the Shapley value payoff of each of
     the large parties is 41 .
   b. Is it desirable according to the Shapley value for the n − 2 small
      parties to form a single united party?
? Exercise 295.5   Show that in a convex game (see Exercise 260.4) the
 Shapley value is a member of the core.
   The result in the following exercise suggests an interpretation of the
 Shapley value that complements those discussed above.
 296             Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value



? Exercise 296.1      Consider the following variant of the bargaining game
 of alternating offers studied in Chapter 7. Let hN, vi be a coalitional
 game with transferable payoff in which v(S) ≥ 0 and v(S ∪{i}) ≥ v(S)+
 v({i}) for every coalition S and player i ∈ N \ S. In each period there
 is a set S ⊆ N of active players, initially N , one of whom, say player i,
 is chosen randomly to propose an S-feasible payoff vector xS,i . Then
 the remaining active players, in some fixed order, each either accepts or
 rejects xS,i . If every active player accepts xS,i then the game ends and
 each player j ∈ S receives the payoff xS,ij . If at least one active player
 rejects xS,i then we move to the next period, in which with probability
 ρ ∈ (0, 1) the set of active players remains S and with probability 1 − ρ
 it becomes S \ {i} (i.e. player i is ejected from the game) and player i
 receives the payoff v({i}). Players do not discount the future.
    Suppose that there is a collection (xS,i )S∈C,i∈S of S-feasible payoff
                                            S\{i}
 vectors such that xS,ij = ρx
                               S
                               j + (1 − ρ)xj      for all S, all i ∈ S, and all
 j ∈ S \ {i}, where xS = i∈S xS,i /|S| for all S. Show that the game
                              P

 has a subgame perfect equilibrium in which each player i ∈ S proposes
 xS,i whenever the set of active players is S. Show further that there is
 such a collection for which xS = ϕ(S, v) for each S ∈ C, thus showing
 that the game has a subgame perfect equilibrium in which the expected
 payoff of each player i is his Shapley value payoff ϕi (N, v). Note that
 if ρ is close to 1 in this case then every proposal xS,i is close to the
 Shapley value of the game hS, vi. (Hart and Mas-Colell (1996) show
 that every subgame perfect equilibrium in which each player’s strategy
 is independent of history has this property; Krishna and Serrano (1995)
 study non-stationary equilibria.)

 14.4.3   Cost-Sharing
 Let N be a set of players and for each coalition S let C(S) be the cost
 of providing some service to the members of S. How should C(N ) be
 shared among the players? One possible answer is given by the Shapley
 value ϕ(C) of the game hN, Ci, where ϕi (C) is the payment requested
 from player i. This method of cost-sharing is supported by the axioms
 presented above, which in the current context can be given the following
                                                P
 interpretations. The feasibility requirement i∈N ϕi (C) = C(N ) says
 that the total payments requested from the players should equal C(N ),
 the total cost of providing the service. The axioms DUM and SYM have
 interpretations as principles of “fairness” when applied to the game.
 DUM says that a player for whom the marginal cost of providing the
Notes                                                                 297



service is the same, no matter which group is currently receiving the
service, should pay that cost. SYM says that two players for whom the
marginal cost is the same, no matter which group is currently receiving
the service, should pay the same. ADD is somewhat more attractive
here than it is in the context of strategic interaction. It says that the
payment of any player for two different services should be the sum of
the payments for the two services separately.

Notes

Stable sets were first studied by von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944).
The idea of the bargaining set is due to Aumann and Maschler (1964);
the formulation that we give is that of Davis and Maschler (1963). The
kernel and nucleolus are due respectively to Davis and Maschler (1965)
and Schmeidler (1969). Proofs of the nonemptiness of the bargaining
set (using direct arguments) were first given by Davis, Maschler, and
Peleg (see Davis and Maschler (1963, 1967) and Peleg (1963b, 1967)).
Our definition of the nucleolus in terms of objections and counterob-
jections appears to be new. The results in Section 14.3.3 (other than
Lemma 286.2) are due to Schmeidler (1969). The Shapley value is due
to Shapley (1953), who proved Proposition 293.1. The balanced contri-
butions property (Definition 291.1) is due to Myerson (1977, 1980); see
also Hart and Mas-Colell (1989).
   The application of the Shapley value to the problem of cost-sharing
was suggested by Shubik (1962); the theory has been developed by many
authors, including Roth and Verrecchia (1979) and Billera, Heath, and
Raanan (1978).
   The game My aunt and I in Examples 282.3 and 285.3 is studied by
Davis and Maschler (1965, Section 6). The result in Exercise 283.1 is due
to Maschler (1976). Exercise 289.1 is taken from Moulin (1988, pp. 126–
127; see also Exercise 5.3). Weighted majority games were first studied
by von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944); the result in Exercise 289.2 is
due to Peleg (1968). The game in Exercise 295.1 is due to Zamir, quoted
in Aumann (1986, p. 986). Exercise 295.2 is taken from Moulin (1988,
p. 111). The result in Exercise 295.4 is due to Milnor and Shapley (1978),
that in Exercise 295.5 to Shapley (1971/72), and that in Exercise 296.1
to Hart and Mas-Colell (1996).
   Much of the material in this chapter draws on Aumann’s (1989) lecture
notes, though some of our interpretations of the solution concepts are
different from his.
298            Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value



   The definitions of stable sets and the bargaining set can be extended
straightforwardly to coalitional games without transferable payoff (see,
for example, Aumann and Peleg (1960) and Peleg (1963a)). For ex-
tensions of the Shapley value to such games see Harsanyi (1963), Shap-
ley (1969), Aumann (1985a), Hart (1985), and Maschler and Owen (1989,
1992).
   Harsanyi (1974) studies an extensive game for which a class of sub-
game perfect equilibria correspond to stable sets. Harsanyi (1981),
Gul (1989), and Hart and Mas-Colell (1996) study extensive games that
have equilibria corresponding to the Shapley value.
   The solution concepts that we study in this chapter can be interpreted
as formalizing notions of “fairness”; for an analysis along these lines see
Moulin (1988).
   Lucas (1992) and Maschler (1992) are surveys that cover the models
in Sections 14.2 and 14.3.
15          The Nash Solution




In this chapter we study two-person bargaining problems from the per-
spective of coalitional game theory. We give a definition of the Nash
solution1 in terms of objections and counterobjections and characterize
the solution axiomatically. In addition we explore the connection be-
tween the Nash solution and the subgame perfect equilibrium outcome
of a bargaining game of alternating offers.

15.1    Bargaining Problems

In Chapter 7 we discuss two-person bargaining using the tools of the
theory of extensive games. Here we do so using the approach of coali-
tional game theory. We define a bargaining problem to be a tuple
hX, D, %1 , %2 i in which X is a set of possible consequences that the
two players can jointly achieve, D ∈ X is the event that occurs if the
players fail to agree, and %1 and %2 are the players’ preference relations
over L(X), the set of lotteries over X. We refer to X as the set of possi-
ble agreements and to D as the disagreement outcome. Note that such
a tuple can be identified with a coalitional game without transferable
payoff h{1, 2}, L(X), V, (%i )i in which V ({1, 2}) = X and V ({i}) = {D}
for i = 1, 2 (see Definition 268.2).
   The members of X should be thought of as deterministic. Note that
we require the players’ preference relations to be defined over the set of
lotteries over X, rather than simply over X itself. That is, each pref-
erence relation includes information not only about the player’s prefer-
ences over the set of possible joint actions but also about his attitude
   1 The only connection between the Nash solution and the notion of Nash equilib-

rium studied in Parts I, II, and III is John Nash.
  300                                         Chapter 15. The Nash Solution



  towards risk. We denote by p · x ⊕ (1 − p) · y the lottery that gives x
  with probability p and y with probability 1 − p and by p · x the lottery
  p · x ⊕ (1 − p) · D.
     Our basic definition of a bargaining problem contains some restric-
  tions, as follows.
I Definition 300.1 A bargaining problem is a tuple hX, D, %1 , %2 i
  where
   •    X (the set of agreements) is a compact set (for example, in a
        Euclidian space)
   •    D (the disagreement outcome) is a member of X
   •    %1 and %2 are continuous preference relations on the set L(X) of
        lotteries over X that satisfy the assumptions of von Neumann and
        Morgenstern
   •    x %i D for all x ∈ X for i = 1, 2, and there exists x ∈ X such that
        x 1 D and x 2 D
   •    (convexity) for any x ∈ X, y ∈ X, and p ∈ [0, 1] there exists z ∈ X
        such that z ∼i p · x ⊕ (1 − p) · y for i = 1, 2
   •    (non-redundancy) if x ∈ X then there is no x0 ∈ X with x0 6= x such
        that x ∼i x0 for i = 1, 2
   •    (unique best agreements) for each player i there is a unique agree-
        ment Bi ∈ X with Bi %i x for all x ∈ X
   •    for each player i we have Bi ∼j D for j 6= i.
     The first three of these assumptions guarantee that each player’s pref-
  erence relation over L(X) can be represented by the expectation of some
  continuous function over X (the player’s von Neumann–Morgenstern
  utility function). The fourth assumption says that disagreement is the
  worst possible outcome and that the problem is non-degenerate in the
  sense that there exists an agreement that is more attractive to both
  players than disagreement. The assumption of convexity requires that
  the set of agreements be rich enough that every lottery is equivalent for
  both players to some (deterministic) agreement. The last three assump-
  tions are made for convenience. The assumption of non-redundancy says
  that we identify any two agreements between which both players are in-
  different. The assumption of unique best agreements implies that the
  best agreement for each player is strongly Pareto efficient (i.e. there is
  no agreement that is better for one player and at least as good for the
  other). The last assumption says that each player is indifferent between
  15.2 The Nash Solution: Definition and Characterization                 301



  disagreement and the outcome in which the other player obtains his
  favorite agreement.
     Given our assumptions on the players’ preferences we can associate
  with any bargaining problem hX, D, %1 , %2 i and any von Neumann–
  Morgenstern utility functions u1 and u2 that represent %1 and %2 a pair
  hU, di in which U = {(u1 (x), u2 (x)): x ∈ X} and d = (u1 (D), u2 (D));
  we can choose u1 and u2 so that d = (0, 0). Our assumptions imply
  that U is compact and convex and contains a point y for which yi > di
  for i = 1, 2. In the standard treatment of the Nash solution such a
  pair hU, di, rather than a description like hX, D, %1 , %2 i of the physical
  agreements and the players’ preferences, is taken as the primitive; we
  find the language of agreements and preferences more natural. Note
  that bargaining problems with different agreement sets and preference
  relations can lead to the same pair hU, di: a bargaining problem contains
  more information than such a pair.
     Our aim now is to construct reasonable systematic descriptions of the
  way that bargaining problems may be resolved. The notion of a bar-
  gaining solution is a formal expression of such a systematic description.
I Definition 301.1 A bargaining solution is a function that assigns
  to every bargaining problem hX, D, %1 , %2 i a unique member of X.
     A bargaining solution describes the way in which the agreement (or
  disagreement) depends upon the parameters of the bargaining problem.
  The bargaining theory that we study focuses on the effect of the players’
  risk attitudes on the bargaining outcome. Alternative theories focus
  on other relevant factors (for example the players’ time preferences or
  their ability to bargain), but such theories require that we change the
  primitives of the model.


  15.2     The Nash Solution: Definition and Characterization

  15.2.1   Definition
  We now define the solution concept that we study in this chapter.
I Definition 301.2 The Nash solution is a bargaining solution that
  assigns to the bargaining problem hX, D, %1 , %2 i an agreement x∗ ∈ X
  for which

   if p · x i x∗ for some p ∈ [0, 1] and x ∈ X then p · x∗ %j x for j 6= i.
                                                                     (301.3)
302                                          Chapter 15. The Nash Solution



   This definition is equivalent to one whose structure is similar to those
of the bargaining set, kernel, and nucleolus given in the previous chapter.
To see this, define an objection of player i to the agreement x∗ ∈ X
to be a pair (x, p) with x ∈ X and p ∈ [0, 1] for which p · x i x∗ . The
interpretation is that x is an alternative agreement that player i proposes
and 1 − p is the probability that the negotiations will break down if
player i presses his objection. The agreement x and the probability p
are chosen by player i; the probability p may be determined indirectly
by the actions (like threats and intimidations) that player i takes when
he presses his demand that the agreement be x. Thus player i makes
an argument of the form “I demand the outcome x rather than x∗ ; I
back up this demand by threatening to take steps that will cause us
to fail to agree with probability 1 − p, a threat that is credible since
if I carry it out and the outcome is x then I will be better off than I
am now”. Player j can counterobject to (x, p) if p · x∗ %j x. The
interpretation is that under the risky conditions that player i creates by
his objection it is desirable for player j to insist on the original agreement
x∗ . Thus player j’s argument is “If you take steps that will cause us to
disagree with probability 1 − p then it is still desirable for me to insist
on x∗ rather than agreeing to x”. Given these definitions of objection
and counterobjection the Nash solution is the set of all agreements x∗
with the property that player j can counterobject to every objection of
player i to x∗ .

15.2.2    Characterization
We now show that the Nash solution is well-defined and has a simple
characterization: the Nash solution of the bargaining problem hX, D,
%1 ,%2 i is the agreement that maximizes the product u1 (x)u2 (x), where
ui is a von Neumann–Morgenstern utility function that represents %i
for i = 1, 2.
Proposition 302.1
a. The agreement x∗ ∈ X is a Nash solution of the bargaining problem
   hX, D, %1 , %2 i if and only if

                  u1 (x∗ )u2 (x∗ ) ≥ u1 (x)u2 (x) for all x ∈ X,

      where ui is a von Neumann–Morgenstern utility function that repre-
      sents %i and satisfies ui (D) = 0 for i = 1, 2.
b. The Nash solution is well-defined.
15.2 The Nash Solution: Definition and Characterization                  303



Proof. We first prove (a). Suppose that u1 (x∗ )u2 (x∗ ) ≥ u1 (x)u2 (x) for
all x ∈ X. Then ui (x∗ ) > 0 for i = 1, 2 (since X contains an agreement
y for which ui (y) > 0 for i = 1, 2). Now, if pui (x) > ui (x∗ ) for some
p ∈ [0, 1] then pui (x)uj (x∗ ) > ui (x∗ )uj (x∗ ) ≥ ui (x)uj (x) and hence
puj (x∗ ) > uj (x) (since ui (x) > 0), or p · x∗ j x.
   Now suppose that x∗ satisfies (301.3): if p · x i x∗ for some p ∈ [0, 1]
and x ∈ X then p · x∗ %j x. Let x ∈ X be such that ui (x) > 0 for
i = 1, 2 and ui (x) > ui (x∗ ) for some i. (For any other value of x we
obviously have u1 (x∗ )u2 (x∗ ) ≥ u1 (x)u2 (x).) Then if p > ui (x∗ )/ui (x)
for some p ∈ [0, 1] we have puj (x∗ ) ≥ uj (x), so that, since uj (x) > 0, we
have p ≥ uj (x)/uj (x∗ ). Hence ui (x∗ )/ui (x) ≥ uj (x)/uj (x∗ ) and thus
u1 (x∗ )u2 (x∗ ) ≥ u1 (x)u2 (x).
   To prove (b), let U = {(u1 (x), u2 (x)): x ∈ X}. By (a), the agree-
ment x∗ is a Nash solution of hX, D, %1 , %2 i if and only if (v1 , v2 ) =
(u1 (x∗ ), u2 (x∗ )) maximizes v1 v2 over U . Since U is compact this prob-
lem has a solution; since the function v1 v2 is strictly quasi-concave on
the interior of R2+ and U is convex the solution is unique. Finally, by
the assumption of non-redundancy there is a unique agreement x∗ ∈ X
that yields the pair of maximizing utilities.                               2
   The simplicity of this characterization is attractive and accounts for
the widespread application of the Nash solution. The characterization
also allows us to illustrate the Nash solution geometrically, as in Fig-
ure 304.1. Although the maximization of a product of utilities is a
simple mathematical operation it lacks a straightforward interpretation;
we view it simply as a technical device. Originally Nash defined the solu-
tion in terms of this characterization; we find Definition 301.2 preferable
since it has a natural interpretation.

15.2.3   Comparative Statics of Risk Aversion
A main goal of Nash’s theory is to provide a relationship between the
players’ attitudes towards risk and the outcome of the bargaining. Thus
a first test of the plausibility of the theory is whether this relation-
ship accords with our intuition. We compare two bargaining problems
that differ only in that one player’s preference relation in one of the
problems is more risk-averse than it is in the other; we verify that the
outcome of the former problem is worse for the player than that of the
latter.
   Define the preference relation %01 to be at least as risk-averse as %1
if %1 and %01 agree on X and whenever x ∼1 L for some x ∈ X and
304                                             Chapter 15. The Nash Solution


                 ↑
                 v2
                                 v1 v2 = u1 (x∗ )u2 (x∗ )



                                                  ∗         ∗
                                           r (u1 (x ), u2 (x ))
                             U=
                      {(u1 (x), u2 (x)): x ∈ X}


                  0                                         v1 →

Figure 304.1 A geometric characterization of the Nash solution x∗ of the bargaining
problem hX, D, %1 , %2 i. For i = 1, 2 the function ui is a von Neumann–Morgenstern
utility function that represents %i and satisfies ui (D) = 0.


L ∈ L(X) we have x %01 L. (This definition is equivalent to the standard
definition that is given in terms of utility representations.)
Proposition 304.1 Let x and x0 be the Nash solutions of the bargaining
problems hX, D, %1 , %2 i and hX, D, %01 , %2 i respectively, where %01 is at
least as risk-averse as %1 . Then x %1 x0 .
Proof. Assume to the contrary that x0 1 x. By the convexity of
the bargaining problems there exists an agreement z ∈ X such that
z ∼i 21 · x0 ⊕ 12 · x for i = 1, 2. Let z ∗ be a Pareto efficient agree-
ment for which z ∗ %i z for i = 1, 2. By the characterization of
the Nash solution (Proposition 302.1a), the agreements x and x0 are
Pareto efficient, so that x ≺1 z ∗ ≺1 x0 and x0 ≺2 z ∗ ≺2 x. Now,
since x is the Nash solution of hX, D, %1 , %2 i we have u1 (x)u2 (x) >
u1 (x0 )u2 (x0 ), where ui is a von Neumann–Morgenstern utility function
with ui (D) = 0 that represents %i for i = 1, 2. By the quasi-concavity
of the function H(v1 , v2 ) = v1 v2 we have u1 (z)u2 (z) > u1 (x0 )u2 (x0 )
and hence u1 (z ∗ )u2 (z ∗ ) > u1 (x0 )u2 (x0 ). Since x0 1 z ∗ it follows that
1 > u1 (z ∗ )/u1 (x0 ) > u2 (x0 )/u2 (z ∗ ), so that there exists p ∈ [0, 1] such
that u1 (z ∗ )/u1 (x0 ) > p > u2 (x0 )/u2 (z ∗ ) and hence p · z ∗ 2 x0 and
z ∗ 1 p · x0 . Since the preference relation %01 is at least as risk-averse as
%1 we also have z ∗ 01 p · x0 , so that (z ∗ , p) is an objection of player 2
to x0 for which there is no counterobjection, contradicting the fact that
x0 is the Nash solution of hX, D, %01 , %2 i.                                   2
  15.3 An Axiomatic Definition                                             305



  15.3     An Axiomatic Definition

  15.3.1   Axioms
  A beauty of the Nash solution is that it is uniquely characterized by
  three simple axioms (properties). In the following statements of these
  axioms F denotes an arbitrary bargaining solution.
  PAR (Pareto efficiency) There is no agreement x ∈ X such that x %i
     F (X, D, %1 , %2 ) for i = 1, 2 with strict preference for at least one i.
  The standard justification of PAR is that an inefficient outcome is not
  likely since it leaves room for renegotiation that makes both players bet-
  ter off. The fact that the Nash solution satisfies PAR follows immediately
  from Proposition 302.1a.
     To state the next axiom we need first to define a symmetric bargain-
  ing problem. Informally, a bargaining problem is symmetric if there is
  a relabeling of the set of agreements that interchanges the players’ pref-
  erence relations: player 1’s preference relation in the relabeled problem
  coincides with player 2’s preference relation in the original problem, and
  vice versa. To state this definition differently, consider the language that
  consists of the names of the preference relations and the name of the dis-
  agreement point, but not the names of the agreements. A problem is
  symmetric if any definition of an agreement by means of a formula in
  this language defines the same agreement if we interchange the names
  of the players.
I Definition 305.1 A bargaining problem hX, D, %1 , %2 i is symmetric
  if there is a function φ: X → X with φ(D) = D and φ(x) = y if and
  only if φ(y) = x, such that L1 %i L2 if and only if φ(L1 ) %j φ(L2 ) for
  i 6= j and for any lotteries L1 and L2 in L(X), where φ(L) is the lottery
  in which each prize x in the support of L is replaced by the prize φ(x).
     We refer to the function φ: X → X in this definition as the symme-
  try function. An example of a symmetric bargaining problem is that
  in which two risk-neutral players split a pie, obtaining nothing if they
  disagree (consider the symmetry function given by φ(x1 , x2 ) = (x2 , x1 )).
  SYM (Symmetry) If hX, D, %1 , %2 i is symmetric with symmetry func-
     tion φ then φ(F (X, D, %1 , %2 )) = F (X, D, %1 , %2 ).
  The justification of this axiom is that we seek a solution in which all
  asymmetries between the players are included in the description of the
  bargaining problem. Thus if players 1 and 2 are indistinguishable in a
306                                            Chapter 15. The Nash Solution



certain problem then the agreement assigned to that problem should not
discriminate between them.
Lemma 306.1 The Nash solution satisfies SYM.
Proof. Let x∗ be the Nash solution of the symmetric bargaining prob-
lem hX, D, %1 , %2 i with symmetry function φ. Suppose that φ(x∗ ) is
not the Nash solution of the bargaining problem hX, D, %2 , %1 i. Then
some player i has an objection (x, p) to φ(x∗ ) for which there is no coun-
terobjection by player j: p · x i φ(x∗ ) and p · φ(x∗ ) ≺j x. But then
φ(p · x) = p · φ(x) j φ(φ(x∗ )) = x∗ and φ(p · φ(x∗ )) = p · x∗ ≺i φ(x),
so that (φ(x), p) is an objection by player j to x∗ for which there is no
counterobjection by player i, contradicting the fact that x∗ is the Nash
solution.                                                                2
  The final axiom is the most problematic.
I IA (Independence of irrelevant alternatives) Let x∗ = F (X, D, %1 , %2 )
     and let %0i be a preference relation that agrees with %i on X and
     satisfies
       •   if x %i x∗ and p · x ∼i x∗ for some x ∈ X and p ∈ [0, 1] then
           p · x -0i x∗
       •   if x -i x∗ and x ∼i p · x∗ for some x ∈ X and p ∈ [0, 1] then
           x ∼0i p · x∗ .
      Then F (X, D, %i , %j ) = F (X, D, %0i , %j ).
A player whose preference relation is %0i is more apprehensive than one
whose preference relation is %i about the risk of demanding alternatives
that are better than x∗ but has the same attitudes to alternatives that
are worse than x∗ . The axiom requires that the outcome when player i
has the preference relation %0i is the same as that when player i has
the preference relation %i . The idea is that if x∗ survives player i’s
objections originally then it should survive them also in a problem in
which he is less eager to make them (i.e. fewer pairs (x, p) are objections
of player i); it should continue also to survive player j’s objections since
player i’s ability to counterobject has not been changed.
   Note that despite its name, the axiom involves a comparison of two
problems in which the sets of alternatives are the same; it is the players’
preferences that are different. (The name derives from the fact that the
axiom is analogous to an axiom presented by Nash that does involve
a comparison of two problems with different sets of agreements.) Note
also that the axiom differs from PAR and SYM in that it involves a com-
15.3 An Axiomatic Definition                                              307



parison of bargaining problems, while PAR and SYM impose conditions
on the solutions of single bargaining problems.
Lemma 307.1 The Nash solution satisfies I IA.
Proof. Let x∗ be the Nash solution of the bargaining problem hX, D,
%i ,%j i and let %0i be a preference relation that satisfies the hypotheses
of I IA. Consider the bargaining problem hX, D, %0i , %j i. We show that
for every objection of either i or j to x∗ in hX, D, %01 , %2 i there is a
counterobjection, so that x∗ is the Nash solution of hX, D, %01 , %2 i.
   First suppose that player i has an objection to x∗ : p · x 0i x∗ for some
x ∈ X and p ∈ [0, 1]. Then x 0i x∗ and hence x i x∗ (since %i and
%0i agree on X). Thus from the first part of I IA we have p · x i x∗ (if
p·x -i x∗ then there exists q ≥ p such that q·x ∼i x∗ and thus q·x -0i x∗ ,
so that p · x -0i x∗ ). Since x∗ is the Nash solution of hX, D, %i , %j i we
thus have p · x∗ %j x.
   Now suppose that player j has an objection to x∗ : p · x %j x∗ for some
x ∈ X and p ∈ [0, 1]. Since x∗ is Pareto efficient we have x∗ %i x and
since x∗ is the Nash solution of hX, D, %i , %j i we have p · x∗ %i x. Thus
from the second part of I IA we have p · x∗ %0i x.                          2

15.3.2   Characterization
The following result completes the characterization of the Nash solution
in terms of the axioms PAR, SYM, and I IA discussed above.
Proposition 307.2 The Nash solution is the only bargaining solution
that satisfies PAR, SYM, and I IA.
Proof. We have shown that the Nash solution satisfies the three axioms;
we now show uniqueness.
  Step 1. Let x∗ be the Nash solution of the bargaining problem hX, D,
%1 ,%2 i. If x ∼i p · x∗ then [1/(2 − p)] · x -j x∗ .
   Proof. For each player i choose the von Neumann–Morgenstern utility
function ui that represents %i and satisfies ui (x∗ ) = 1 and ui (D) =
0. We first argue that for every agreement y ∈ X we have u1 (y) +
u2 (y) ≤ 2. To see this, suppose to the contrary that for some y ∈ X
we have u1 (y) + u2 (y) = 2 +  with  > 0. By the convexity of the
bargaining problem, for every p ∈ [0, 1] there is an agreement z(p) ∈ X
with ui (z(p)) = pui (y) + (1 − p)ui (x∗ ) = pui (y) + 1 − p for i = 1, 2, so
that u1 (z(p))u2 (z(p)) = 1 + p + p2 [u1 (y)u2 (y) − 1 − ]. Thus for p close
enough to 0 we have u1 (z(p))u2 (z(p)) > 1 = u1 (x∗ )u2 (x∗ ), contradicting
308                                            Chapter 15. The Nash Solution



the fact that x∗ is the Nash solution of the problem. Now, if x ∼i p · x∗
we have ui (x) = p and hence uj (x) ≤ 2 − p, so that [1/(2 − p)] · x -j x∗ .
  Step 2. Any bargaining solution that satisfies PAR, SYM, and I IA is
the Nash solution.
   Proof. Let x∗ be the Nash solution of the bargaining problem hX, D,
%1 ,%2 i and let F be a bargaining solution that satisfies PAR, SYM, and
I IA. Let %01 and %02 be preference relations that coincide with %1 and
%2 on X and satisfy the following conditions. For any Pareto efficient
agreement x ∈ X we have
  •   if x 1 x∗ and x ∼2 p · x∗ for some p ∈ [0, 1] then x ∼02 p · x∗ and
      x∗ ∼01 [1/(2 − p)] · x.
  •   if x ≺1 x∗ and x ∼1 p · x∗ for some p ∈ [0, 1] then x ∼01 p · x∗ and
      x∗ ∼02 [1/(2 − p)] · x
(These conditions completely describe a pair of preference relations sat-
isfying the assumptions of von Neumann and Morgenstern since for every
x ∈ X and each player i there is some Pareto efficient agreement x0 for
which x ∼i x0 .) Let ui be the von Neumann–Morgenstern utility func-
tion that represents %0i and satisfies ui (D) = 0 and ui (x∗ ) = 1 for i = 1,
2. Then u1 (x) + u2 (x) = 2 for all Pareto efficient agreements x ∈ X.
   It is easy to verify that the problem hX, D, %01 , %02 i is convex. (One
way to do so is to verify that the set of pairs of utilities is the triangle
{(v1 , v2 ): v1 + v2 ≤ 2 and vi ≥ 0 for i = 1, 2}. To show this, use the fact
that since Bi is Pareto efficient and Bi ∼j D we have uj (Bi ) = 0 and
ui (Bi ) = 2.) To see that the problem is symmetric, define φ: X → X by
φ(D) = D and [p · B1 ∼01 x and q · B2 ∼02 x] if and only if [p · B2 ∼02 φ(x)
and q · B1 ∼01 φ(x)]. This function φ assigns an agreement with the
utilities (v1 , v2 ) to an agreement with utilities (v2 , v1 ). Thus, an efficient
agreement that is a fixed point of φ yields the pair of utilities (1, 1)
and hence by non-redundancy is x∗ . Thus by SYM and PAR we have
F (X, D, %01 , %02 ) = x∗ .
   Now, the pair of problems hX, D, %01 , %02 i and hX, D, %1 , %02 i and the
pair of problems hX, D, %1 , %2 i and hX, D, %1 , %02 i satisfy the hypothesis
of I IA since by Step 1 we have [1/(2−p)]·x -j x∗ if x ∼i p·x∗ . Therefore
F (X, D, %1 , %2 ) = F (X, D, %01 , %02 ) = x∗ .                                2
  As noted earlier, Nash defined a bargaining problem to be a pair
hU, di, where U ⊆ R2 is a compact convex set (the set of pairs of payoffs
to agreements) and d ∈ U (the pair of payoffs in the event of disagree-
ment). A bargaining solution in this context is a function that assigns
 15.3 An Axiomatic Definition                                                    309



 a point in U to every bargaining problem hU, di. Nash showed that
 there is a unique bargaining solution that satisfies axioms similar to
 those considered above and that this solution assigns to the bargaining
 problem hU, di the pair (v1 , v2 ) of payoffs in U for which the product
 (v1 − d1 )(v2 − d2 ) is highest. The following exercise asks you to prove
 this result.
? Exercise 309.1     Show, following the line of the proof of the previous
 result, that in the standard Nash bargaining model (as presented in the
 previous paragraph) there is a unique bargaining solution that satisfies
 analogs of PAR and SYM and the following two axioms, in which f
 denotes a bargaining solution.
 (Covariance with positive affine transformations) Let hU, di be a bar-
    gaining problem, let αi > 0 and βi be real numbers, let

      U 0 = {(v10 , v20 ): vi0 = αi vi + βi for i = 1, 2 for some (v1 , v2 ) ∈ U },

    and let d0i = αi di + βi for i = 1, 2. Then fi (U 0 , d0 ) = αi fi (U, d) + βi
    for i = 1, 2.
 (Independence of irrelevant alternatives) If U ⊆ U 0 and f (U 0 , d) ∈ U
    then f (U 0 , d) = f (U, d).

 15.3.3   Is Any Axiom Superfluous?
 We have shown that the axioms PAR, SYM, and I IA uniquely define the
 Nash solution; we now show that none of these axioms is superfluous.
 We do so by exhibiting, for each axiom, a bargaining solution that is
 different from Nash’s and satisfies the remaining two axioms.
   PAR: Consider the solution defined by F (X, D, %1 , %2 ) = D. This
 satisfies SYM and I IA and differs from the Nash solution.
? Exercise 309.2     Show that there is a solution F different from the
 Nash solution that satisfies SYM, I IA, and F (X, D, %1 , %2 ) i D for
 i = 1, 2 (strict individual rationality). Roth (1977) shows that in the
 standard Nash bargaining model (as presented in the previous exercise)
 the axioms SYM, I IA, and strict individual rationality are sufficient to
 characterize the Nash solution. Account for the difference.
   SYM: For each α ∈ (0, 1) consider the solution (an asymmetric Nash
 solution) that assigns to hX, D, %1 , %2 i the agreement x∗ for which
 (u1 (x∗ ))α (u2 (x∗ ))1−α ≥ (u1 (x))α (u2 (x))1−α for all x ∈ X, where u1
 and u2 represent %1 and %2 and satisfy ui (D) = 0 for i = 1, 2.
 310                                           Chapter 15. The Nash Solution



? Exercise 310.1        Show that any asymmetric Nash solution is well-
 defined (the agreement that it selects does not depend on the utility
 functions chosen to represent the preferences), satisfies PAR and I IA,
 and, for α 6= 12 , differs from the Nash solution.
    I IA: Let hX, D, %1 , %2 i be a bargaining problem and let ui be a util-
 ity function that represents %i and satisfies ui (D) = 0 for i = 1, 2.
 The Kalai–Smorodinsky solution assigns to hX, D, %1 , %2 i the Pareto
 efficient agreement x for which u1 (x)/u2 (x) = u1 (B1 )/u2 (B2 ).
? Exercise 310.2     Show that the Kalai–Smorodinsky solution is well-
 defined, satisfies SYM and PAR, and differs from the Nash solution.

 15.4    The Nash Solution and the Bargaining Game of
         Alternating Offers

 We now show that there is a close relationship between the Nash solution
 and the subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of the bargaining game
 of alternating offers studied in Chapter 7, despite the different methods
 that are used to derive them.
    Fix a bargaining problem hX, D, %1 , %2 i and consider the version of
 the bargaining game of alternating offers described in Section 7.4.4, in
 which the set of agreements is X, the preference relations of the players
 are %1 and %2 , and the outcome that results if negotiations break down
 at the end of a period, an event with probability α ∈ (0, 1), is D. Under
 assumptions analogous to A1–A4 (Section 7.3.1) this game has a unique
 subgame perfect equilibrium outcome: player 1 proposes x∗ (α), which
 player 2 accepts, where (x∗ (α), y ∗ (α)) is the pair of Pareto efficient agree-
 ments that satisfies (1 − α) · x∗ (α) ∼1 y ∗ (α) and (1 − α) · y ∗ (α) ∼2 x∗ (α)
 (see Exercise 130.2).
 Proposition 310.3 Let hX, D, %1 , %2 i be a bargaining problem. The
 agreements x∗ (α) and y ∗ (α) proposed by the players in every subgame
 perfect equilibrium of the variant of the bargaining game of alternating
 offers associated with hX, D, %1 , %2 i in which there is a probability α
 of breakdown after any rejection both converge to the Nash solution of
 hX, D, %1 , %2 i as α → 0.
 Proof. Let ui represent the preference relation %i and satisfy ui (D) = 0
 for i = 1, 2. From the conditions defining x∗ (α) and y ∗ (α) we have
 u1 (x∗ (α))u2 (x∗ (α)) = u1 (y ∗ (α))u2 (y ∗ (α)). Since x∗ (α) 1 y ∗ (α) for
 all α ∈ [0, 1) we have x∗ (α) %1 z ∗ %1 y ∗ (α), where z ∗ is the Nash
15.5 An Exact Implementation of the Nash Solution                             311


                     ↑        v1 v2 = u1 (x∗ (α))u2 (x∗ (α))
                     v2
                                          (= u1 (y ∗ (α))u2 (y ∗ (α)))


            u2 (y ∗ (α))       r        v1 v2 = u1 (z ∗ )u2 (z ∗ )

                                                       ∗         ∗
                                               r (u1 (z ), u2 (z ))


            u2 (x∗ (α))                                    r

                      0 u1 (y ∗ (α))               u1 (x∗ (α)) v1 →

         Figure 311.1 An illustration of the proof of Proposition 310.3.


solution of hX, D, %1 , %2 i (see Figure 311.1). For any sequence (αk )∞      k=1
converging to 0 we have ui (x∗ (αk )) − ui (y ∗ (αk )) → 0 for i = 1, 2 by
the definition of x∗ (αk ) and y ∗ (αk ), so that ui (x∗ (αk )) and ui (y ∗ (αk ))
converge to ui (z ∗ ) for i = 1, 2 and thus x∗ (αk ) and y ∗ (αk ) converge to
z ∗ (using non-redundancy).                                                     2

15.5    An Exact Implementation of the Nash Solution

We now return to the implementation approach described in Chapter 10.
A byproduct of the result in the previous section is that the bargaining
game of alternating offers with risk of breakdown approximately SPE-
implements the Nash solution. We now describe an extensive game with
perfect information that exactly implements it. From the point of view of
a planner this game has the advantage that it is simpler, in the sense that
it involves a small number of stages. However, it has the disadvantage
of being more remote from familiar bargaining procedures.
   Fix a set X and an event D and assume the planner wants to imple-
ment the Nash solution for all pairs (%1 , %2 ) for which hX, D, %1 , %2 i is
a bargaining problem. Consider the extensive game form (with perfect
information and chance moves) consisting of the following stages.
  •   Player 1 chooses y ∈ X.
  •   Player 2 chooses x ∈ X and p ∈ [0, 1].
  •   With probability 1 − p the game ends, with the outcome D, and
      with probability p it continues.
 312                                        Chapter 15. The Nash Solution


    •   Player 1 chooses either x or the lottery p · y; this choice is the
        outcome.

 Proposition 312.1 The game form described above SPE-implements
 the Nash solution.
? Exercise 312.2   Let x∗ be the Nash solution of hX, D, %1 , %2 i. Show
         ∗
 that x is the unique subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of the game
 form when the players’ preferences are (%1 , %2 ).

 Notes

 The seminal paper on the topic of this chapter is Nash (1950b).
    Our presentation follows Rubinstein, Safra, and Thomson (1992).
 Zeuthen (1930, Ch. IV) contains an early model in which negotiators
 bear in mind the risk of a breakdown when making demands. The con-
 nection between the Nash solution and the subgame perfect equilibrium
 outcome of a bargaining game of alternating offers was first pointed out
 by Binmore (1987) and was further investigated by Binmore, Rubinstein,
 and Wolinsky (1986). The exact implementation of the Nash solution
 in Section 15.5 is due to Howard (1992).
    The comparative static result of Section 15.2.3 concerning the effect of
 the players’ degree of risk aversion on the solution was first explored by
 Kihlstrom, Roth, and Schmeidler (1981). Harsanyi and Selten (1972)
 study the asymmetric Nash solutions described in Section 15.3.3 (ax-
 iomatizations appear in Kalai (1977) and Roth (1979, p. 16)) and Kalai
 and Smorodinsky (1975) axiomatize the Kalai–Smorodinsky solution.
 Exercise 309.2 is based on Roth (1977).
    Several other papers (e.g. Roemer (1988)) study models in which the
 set of physical agreements, rather than the resulting set of utility pairs
 (as in Nash’s model), is a primitive. Roth (1979) and Kalai (1985) are
 surveys of the field of axiomatic bargaining theory.
List of Results




This is a list of the main results in the book, stated informally. It is
designed to give an overview of the properties of the solutions that we
study. Not all conditions are included in the statements; refer to the
complete statements in the text for details.

Strategic Games

Nash Equilibrium and Mixed Strategy Equilibrium
(Nash equilibrium existence) Every game in which the action set of each
player is compact and convex and the preference relation of each player
is continuous and quasi-concave has a Nash equilibrium
                                                      Proposition 20.3
A symmetric game has a symmetric Nash equilibrium            Exercise 20.4
In a strictly competitive game that has a Nash equilibrium, a pair of
actions is a Nash equilibrium if and only if each action is a maxminimizer
                                                           Proposition 22.2
(Mixed strategy equilibrium existence) Every finite game has a mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium                             Proposition 33.1
A mixed strategy profile is a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of a finite
game if and only if every player is indifferent between all actions in the
support of his equilibrium strategy                          Lemma 33.2
A strategy profile in a finite two-player strategic game is a trembling
hand perfect equilibrium if and only if it is mixed strategy Nash equi-
librium and the strategy of neither player is weakly dominated
                                                      Proposition 248.2
314                                                         List of Results



(Trembling hand perfect equilibrium existence) Every finite strategic
game has a trembling hand perfect equilibrium      Proposition 249.1

Correlated Equilibrium
Every mixed strategy Nash equilibrium corresponds to a correlated equi-
librium                                               Proposition 45.3
Every convex combination of correlated equilibrium payoff profiles is a
correlated equilibrium payoff profile                Proposition 46.2
Every correlated equilibrium outcome is the outcome of a correlated
equilibrium in which the set of states is the set of action profiles
                                                          Proposition 47.1

Rationalizability
Every action used with positive probability in a correlated equilibrium
is rationalizable                                          Lemma 56.2
An action is a never-best response if and only if it is strictly dominated
                                                               Lemma 60.1
An action that is not weakly dominated is a best response to a completely
mixed belief                                                Exercise 64.2
Actions that survive iterated elimination of strictly dominated actions
are rationalizable                                      Proposition 61.2

Knowledge
(Individuals cannot agree to disagree) If two individuals have the same
prior and their posterior beliefs are common knowledge then these beliefs
are the same                                            Proposition 75.1
If each player is rational, knows the other players’ actions, and has a
belief consistent with his knowledge, then the action profile is a Nash
equilibrium                                            Proposition 77.1
If there are two players and each player knows that the other player
is rational, knows the other player’s belief, and has a belief consistent
with his knowledge, then the pair of beliefs is a mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium                                             Proposition 78.1
List of Results                                                         315



If it is common knowledge that each player is rational and that each
players’ belief is consistent with his knowledge then each player’s action
is rationalizable                                        Proposition 80.1
If all players are rational in all states, every player’s belief in every
state is derived from a common prior, and each player’s action is the
same in all states in any given member of his information partition,
then the information partitions and actions correspond to a correlated
equilibrium                                                Exercise 81.1

Extensive Games with Perfect Information

Basic Theory
A strategy profile is a subgame perfect equilibrium of a finite horizon
game if and only if it has the one deviation property
                             Lemma 98.2, Exercise 102.1, Exercise 103.3
(Subgame perfect equilibrium existence: Kuhn’s theorem) Every finite
game has a subgame perfect equilibrium
                                       Proposition 99.2, Exercise 102.1
All players are indifferent among all subgame perfect equilibria of a finite
game that satisfies the no indifference condition, and all equilibria are
interchangeable                                            Exercise 100.2

Bargaining Games
A bargaining game of alternating offers that satisfies A1–A4 has a unique
subgame perfect equilibrium outcome                     Proposition 122.1
In a subgame perfect equilibrium of a bargaining game of alternating
offers, a player is worse off the more impatient he is Proposition 126.1

Infinitely Repeated Games
(Nash folk theorem for limit of means) Every feasible enforceable payoff
profile of the constituent game is a Nash equilibrium payoff profile of the
limit of means infinitely repeated game                Proposition 144.3
(Nash folk theorem for discounting) Every feasible strictly enforceable
payoff profile of the constituent game is close to a Nash equilibrium
payoff profile of the discounting infinitely repeated game for a discount
factor close enough to 1                                Proposition 145.2
316                                                         List of Results



(Perfect folk theorem for limit of means) Every feasible strictly enforce-
able payoff profile of the constituent game is a subgame perfect equilib-
rium payoff profile of the limit of means infinitely repeated game
                                                        Proposition 146.2
(Perfect folk theorem for overtaking) For every strictly enforceable out-
come of the constituent game there is a subgame perfect equilibrium of
the overtaking infinitely repeated game consisting of a repetition of the
outcome                                                Proposition 149.1
(Perfect folk theorem for discounting) For every feasible strictly enforce-
able outcome of a full-dimensional constituent game there is a discount
factor close enough to 1 for which there is a subgame perfect equilibrium
of the discounting infinitely repeated game consisting of a repetition of
the outcome                                            Proposition 151.1
A strategy profile is a subgame perfect equilibrium of a discounted in-
finitely repeated game if and only if it has the one deviation property
                                                            Lemma 153.1
For any subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of a discounted infinitely
repeated game there is a strategy profile that generates the same out-
come in which the sequence of action profiles that follows a deviation
depends only on the identity of the deviant (not on the history or on
the nature of the deviation)                         Proposition 154.1
In every equilibrium of a machine game of a discounted infinitely re-
peated game there is a one-to-one correspondence between the actions
chosen by the two machines in the repeated game        Lemma 170.1
Every equilibrium of a machine game of a discounted infinitely repeated
game consists of an introductory phase, in which all the states are dis-
tinct, followed by a cycling phase, in each cycle of which each state
appears at most once                                  Proposition 171.1

Finitely Repeated Games
If the payoff profile in every Nash equilibrium of the constituent game is
the profile of minmax payoffs then every Nash equilibrium of the finitely
repeated game generates a sequence of Nash equilibria of the constituent
game                                                     Proposition 155.1
(Nash folk theorem for finitely repeated games) If the constituent game
has a Nash equilibrium in which every player’s payoff exceeds his min-
max payoff then for any strictly enforceable outcome there is a Nash
List of Results                                                        317



equilibrium of the finitely repeated game in which each player’s payoff
is close to his payoff from the outcome              Proposition 156.1
If the constituent game has a unique Nash equilibrium payoff profile
then every subgame perfect equilibrium of the finitely repeated game
generates a sequence of Nash equilibria of the constituent game
                                                      Proposition 157.2
(Perfect folk theorem for finitely repeated games) If the constituent game
is full dimensional and for every player there are two Nash equilibria that
yield different payoffs then for any strictly enforceable outcome a suffi-
ciently long finitely repeated game has a subgame perfect equilibrium in
which each player’s payoff is close to his payoff from the outcome
                                                         Proposition 159.1

Implementation Theory

(Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem) In an environment in which there are
at least three consequences and any preference ordering is possible, any
choice rule that is DSE-implementable and satisfies the condition that
for any consequence there is a preference profile for which the choice rule
induces that consequence is dictatorial                 Proposition 181.2
(Revelation principle for DSE-implementation) If a choice rule is DSE-
implementable then it is truthfully DSE-implementable. Lemma 181.4
(Revelation principle for Nash-implementation) If a choice rule is Nash-
implementable then it is truthfully Nash-implementable. Lemma 185.2
If a choice rule is Nash-implementable then it is monotonic
                                                      Proposition 186.2
In an environment in which there are at least three players, a choice rule
that is monotonic and has no veto power is Nash-implementable
                                                       Proposition 187.2
In an environment in which there are at least three players, who can be
required to pay monetary fines, every choice function is virtually SPE-
implementable                                         Proposition 193.1

Extensive Games with Imperfect Information

For any mixed strategy of a player in a finite extensive game with perfect
recall there is an outcome-equivalent behavioral strategy
                                                         Proposition 214.1
318                                                         List of Results



Every sequential equilibrium of the extensive game associated with a
finite Bayesian game with observable actions induces a perfect Bayesian
equilibrium of the Bayesian game                      Proposition 234.1
Every trembling hand perfect equilibrium of a finite extensive game with
perfect recall is associated with a sequential equilibrium
                                                         Proposition 251.2
(Trembling hand perfect equilibrium and sequential equilibrium existence)
Every finite extensive game with perfect recall has a trembling hand per-
fect equilibrium and hence a sequential equilibrium       Corollary 253.2

Coalitional Games

Core
A coalitional game with transferable payoff has a nonempty core if and
only if it is balanced                               Proposition 262.1
Every market with transferable payoff has a nonempty core
                                                   Proposition 264.2
Every profile of competitive payoffs in a market with transferable payoff
is in the core of the market                           Proposition 267.1
Every competitive allocation in an exchange economy is in the core
                                                   Proposition 272.1
If every agent’s preference relation is increasing and strictly quasi-
concave and every agent’s endowment of every good is positive, the core
converges to the set of competitive allocations     Proposition 273.1

Stable Sets
The core is a subset of every stable set; no stable set is a proper subset
of any other; if the core is a stable set then it is the only stable set
                                                          Proposition 279.2

Bargaining Set, Kernel, Nucleolus
In a coalitional game with transferable payoff the nucleolus is a member
of the kernel, which is a subset of the bargaining set
                                                Lemmas 285.1 and 287.1
The nucleolus of any coalitional game with transferable payoff is a sin-
gleton                                               Proposition 288.4
List of Results                                                       319



Shapley Value
The unique value that satisfies the balanced contributions property is
the Shapley value                                   Proposition 291.3
The Shapley value is the only value that satisfies axioms of symmetry,
dummy, and additivity                                 Proposition 293.1

Nash Solution
The definition of the Nash solution of a bargaining problem in terms of
objections and counterobjections is equivalent to the definition of it as
the agreement that maximizes the product of the players’ von Neumann–
Morgenstern utilities                                 Proposition 302.1
In the Nash solution a player is worse off the more risk-averse he is
                                                       Proposition 304.1
The Nash solution is the only bargaining solution that satisfies axioms of
Pareto efficiency, symmetry, and independence of irrelevant alternatives
                                                       Proposition 307.2
The agreements proposed by the players in every subgame perfect equi-
librium outcome of the variant of a bargaining game of alternating offers
in which there is a risk of breakdown converge to the Nash solution
                                                      Proposition 310.3
References




The numbers in brackets after each reference indicate the pages on which the reference
is cited.

Abreu, D. (1988), “On the Theory of Infinitely Repeated Games with
      Discounting”, Econometrica 56, 383–396. [160]
Abreu, D., P. K. Dutta, and L. Smith (1994), “The Folk Theorem for
      Repeated Games: A NEU Condition”, Econometrica 62, 939–
      948. [160]
Abreu, D., and H. Matsushima (1992), “Virtual Implementation in Iter-
      atively Undominated Strategies: Complete Information”, Econo-
      metrica 60, 993–1008. [195]
Abreu, D., and A. Rubinstein (1988), “The Structure of Nash Equilib-
      rium in Repeated Games with Finite Automata”, Econometrica
      56, 1259–1281. [175]
Arrow, K. J., E. W. Barankin, and D. Blackwell (1953), “Admissible
      Points of Convex Sets”, pp. 87–91 in Contributions to the Theory
      of Games, Volume II (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 28) (H. W.
      Kuhn and A. W. Tucker, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University
      Press. [52, 65]
Arrow, K. J., and F. H. Hahn (1971), General Competitive Analysis.
      San Francisco: Holden-Day. [270]
Aumann, R. J. (1959), “Acceptable Points in General Cooperative n-
      Person Games”, pp. 287–324 in Contributions to the Theory of
      Games, Volume IV (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 40) (A. W.
      Tucker and R. D. Luce, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University
      Press. [160]
Aumann, R. J. (1964), “Markets with a Continuum of Traders”, Econo-
      metrica 32, 39–50. [275]
322                                                          References



Aumann, R. J. (1974), “Subjectivity and Correlation in Randomized
      Strategies”, Journal of Mathematical Economics 1, 67–96. [51]
Aumann, R. J. (1975), “Values of Markets with a Continuum of Tra-
      ders”, Econometrica 43, 611–646. [294]
Aumann, R. J. (1976), “Agreeing to Disagree”, Annals of Statistics 4,
      1236–1239. [84]
Aumann, R. J. (1985a), “An Axiomatization of the Non-Transferable
      Utility Value”, Econometrica 53, 599–612. [298]
Aumann, R. J. (1985b), “What Is Game Theory Trying to Accom-
      plish?”, pp. 28–76 in Frontiers of Economics (K. J. Arrow and
      S. Honkapohja, eds.), Oxford: Basil Blackwell. [8]
Aumann, R. J. (1986), “Rejoinder”, Econometrica 54, 985–989. [297]
Aumann, R. J. (1987a), “Correlated Equilibrium as an Expression of
      Bayesian Rationality”, Econometrica 55, 1–18. [51, 85]
Aumann, R. J. (1987b), “Game Theory”, pp. 460–482 in The New Pal-
      grave, Volume 2 (J. Eatwell, M. Milgate, and P. Newman, eds.),
      London: Macmillan. [8]
Aumann, R. J. (1989), Lectures on Game Theory. Boulder: Westview
      Press. [275, 297]
Aumann, R. J., and A. Brandenburger (1995), “Epistemic Conditions
      for Nash Equilibrium”, Econometrica 63, 1161–1180. [80, 84]
Aumann, R. J., and M. Maschler (1964), “The Bargaining Set for Coop-
      erative Games”, pp. 443–476 in Advances in Game Theory (An-
      nals of Mathematics Studies, 52) (M. Dresher, L. S. Shapley, and
      A. W. Tucker, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press. [297]
Aumann, R. J., and M. Maschler (1972), “Some Thoughts on the Mini-
      max Principle”, Management Science 18, P-54–P-63. [218]
Aumann, R. J., and B. Peleg (1960), “Von Neumann–Morgenstern So-
      lutions to Cooperative Games without Side Payments”, Bulletin
      of the American Mathematical Society 66, 173–179. [275, 298]
Aumann, R. J., and L. S. Shapley (1994), “Long-Term Competition—A
      Game-Theoretic Analysis”, pp. 1–15 in Essays in Game Theory
      (N. Megiddo, ed.), New York: Springer-Verlag. [160]
Bacharach, M. (1985), “Some Extensions of a Claim of Aumann in an
      Axiomatic Model of Knowledge”, Journal of Economic Theory
      37, 167–190. [85]
Banks, J. S., and J. Sobel (1987), “Equilibrium Selection in Signaling
      Games”, Econometrica 55, 647–661. [246, 254]
References                                                         323



Barberá, S. (1983), “Strategy-Proofness and Pivotal Voters: A Di-
       rect Proof of the Gibbard–Satterthwaite Theorem”, International
       Economic Review 24, 413–417. [195]
Battigalli, P. (1988), “Implementable Strategies, Prior Information and
       the Problem of Credibility in Extensive Games”, Rivista Inter-
       nazionale di Scienze Economiche e Commerciali 35, 705–733.
       [254]
Battigalli, P. (1996), “Strategic Independence and Perfect Bayesian
       Equilibria”, Journal of Economic Theory, 70, 201–234. [254]
Battigalli, P., M. Gilli, and M. C. Molinari (1992), “Learning and Con-
       vergence to Equilibrium in Repeated Strategic Interactions: An
       Introductory Survey”, Ricerche Economiche 46, 335–377. [52]
Benoı̂t, J.-P., and V. Krishna (1985), “Finitely Repeated Games”, Econ-
       ometrica 53, 905–922. [160]
Benoı̂t, J.-P., and V. Krishna (1987), “Nash Equilibria of Finitely Re-
       peated Games”, International Journal of Game Theory 16, 197–
       204. [160]
Ben-Porath, E., and E. Dekel (1992), “Signaling Future Actions and the
       Potential for Sacrifice”, Journal of Economic Theory 57, 36–51.
       [115]
Ben-Porath, E., and B. Peleg (1987), “On the Folk Theorem and Finite
       Automata”, Research Memorandum 77, Center for Research in
       Mathematical Economics and Game Theory, Hebrew University,
       Jerusalem. [160]
Bernheim, B. D. (1984), “Rationalizable Strategic Behavior”, Econo-
       metrica 52, 1007–1028. [64]
Billera, L. J. (1970), “Some Theorems on the Core of an n-Person Game
       without Side-Payments”, SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics
       18, 567–579. [269, 275]
Billera, L. J., D. C. Heath, and J. Raanan (1978), “Internal Telephone
       Billing Rates—A Novel Application of Non-Atomic Game The-
       ory”, Operations Research 26, 956–965. [297]
Binmore, K. G. (1985), “Bargaining and Coalitions”, pp. 269–304 in
       Game-Theoretic Models of Bargaining (A. E. Roth, ed.), Cam-
       bridge: Cambridge University Press. [131]
Binmore, K. G. (1987), “Nash Bargaining Theory II”, pp. 61–76 in The
       Economics of Bargaining (K. G. Binmore and P. Dasgupta, eds.),
       Oxford: Blackwell. [312]
Binmore, K. G. (1987/88), “Modeling Rational Players, Parts I and II”,
       Economics and Philosophy 3, 179–214 and 4, 9–55. [5, 8]
324                                                             References



Binmore, K. G. (1992), Fun and Games. Lexington, Massachusetts:
       D. C. Heath. [8]
Binmore, K. G., and A. Brandenburger (1990), “Common Knowledge
       and Game Theory”, pp. 105–150 in Essays on the Foundations of
       Game Theory (K. G. Binmore), Oxford: Blackwell. [85]
Binmore, K. G., A. Rubinstein, and A. Wolinsky (1986), “The Nash
       Bargaining Solution in Economic Modelling”, Rand Journal of
       Economics 17, 176–188. [131, 312]
Bondareva, O. N. (Бондарева, О. Н.) (1963), “Некоторые Применения
       Методов Линейного Программирования к Теории Коопера-
       тивных Игр”, Проблемы Кибернетики (Problemy Kibernetiki)
       10, 119–139. [274]
Borel, E. (1921), “La Théorie du Jeu et les Equations Intégrales à Noyau
       Symétrique”, Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Séances de
       l’Académie des Sciences (Paris) 173, 1304–1308. (Translated
       as “The Theory of Play and Integral Equations with Skew Sym-
       metric Kernels”, Econometrica 21 (1953), pp. 97–100.) [29, 51]
Borel, E. (1924), Eléments de la Théorie des Probabilités (Third Edi-
       tion). Paris: Librairie Scientifique, J. Hermann. (Pp. 204–221
       translated as “On Games That Involve Chance and the Skill of
       the Players”, Econometrica 21 (1953), 101–115.) [51]
Borel, E. (1927), “Sur les Systèmes de Formes Linéaires à Déterminant
       Symétrique Gauche et la Théorie Générale du Jeu”, Comptes
       Rendus Hebdomadaires des Séances de l’Académie des Sciences
       (Paris) 184, 52–54. (Translated as “On Systems of Linear Forms
       of Skew Symmetric Determinant and the General Theory of Play”,
       Econometrica 21 (1953), 116–117.) [51]
Brams, S. J., D. M. Kilgour, and M. D. Davis (1993), “Unraveling in
       Games of Sharing and Exchange”, pp. 195–212 in Frontiers of
       Game Theory (K. G. Binmore, A. Kirman, and P. Tani, eds.),
       Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. [30]
Brams, S. J., and A. D. Taylor (1994), “Divide the Dollar: Three
       Solutions and Extensions”, Theory and Decision 37, 211–231.
       [65]
Brandenburger, A. (1992), “Knowledge and Equilibrium in Games”,
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 6, 83–101. [84]
Brown, G. W. (1951), “Iterative Solution of Games by Fictitious Play”,
       pp. 374–376 in Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation
       (T. C. Koopmans, ed.), New York: Wiley. [52]
References                                                          325



Carnap, R. (1966), Philosophical Foundations of Physics. New York:
       Basic Books. [5]
Cho, I.-K., and D. M. Kreps (1987), “Signaling Games and Stable
       Equilibria”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, 179–221. [254]
Chung, K. L. (1974), A Course in Probability Theory (Second Edition).
       New York: Academic Press. [7]
Clarke, E. H. (1971), “Multipart Pricing of Public Goods”, Public Choice
       11, 17–33. [183]
Cournot, A. A. (1838), Recherches sur les Principes Mathématiques de
       la Théorie des Richesses. Paris: Hachette. (English transla-
       tion: Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the Theory
       of Wealth, New York: Macmillan, 1897.) [30]
Crawford, V. P. (1990), “Equilibrium without Independence”, Journal
       of Economic Theory 50, 127–154. [52]
Davis, M., and M. Maschler (1963), “Existence of Stable Payoff Con-
       figurations for Cooperative Games”, Bulletin of the American
       Mathematical Society 69, 106–108. [297]
Davis, M., and M. Maschler (1965), “The Kernel of a Cooperative
       Game”, Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 12, 223–259. [297]
Davis, M., and M. Maschler (1967), “Existence of Stable Payoff Config-
       urations for Cooperative Games”, pp. 39–52 in Essays in Math-
       ematical Economics (M. Shubik, ed.), Princeton: Princeton Uni-
       versity Press. [297]
Debreu, G., and H. E. Scarf (1963), “A Limit Theorem on the Core of
       an Economy”, International Economic Review 4, 235–246. [275]
Derman, C. (1970), Finite State Markovian Decision Processes. New
       York: Academic Press. [168]
Diamond, P. A. (1965), “The Evaluation of Infinite Utility Streams”,
       Econometrica 33, 170–177. [160]
Dubey, P., and M. Kaneko (1984), “Information Patterns and Nash
       Equilibria in Extensive Games: I”, Mathematical Social Sciences
       8, 111–139. [115]
Edgeworth, F. Y. (1881), Mathematical Psychics. London: Kegan Paul.
       [275]
Elmes, S., and P. J. Reny (1994), “On the Strategic Equivalence of
       Extensive Form Games”, Journal of Economic Theory 62, 1–23.
       [218]
Fishburn, P. C., and A. Rubinstein (1982), “Time Preference”, Interna-
       tional Economic Review 23, 677–694. [119, 131]
326                                                         References



Forges, F. (1992), “Repeated Games of Incomplete Information: Non-
       Zero-Sum”, pp. 155–177 in Handbook of Game Theory with Eco-
       nomic Applications, Volume 1 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.),
       Amsterdam: North-Holland. [161]
Friedman, J. W. (1971), “A Non-Cooperative Equilibrium for Super-
       games”, Review of Economic Studies 38, 1–12. [160]
Friedman, J. W. (1985), “Cooperative Equilibria in Finite Horizon Non-
       cooperative Supergames”, Journal of Economic Theory 35, 390–
       398. [160]
Friedman, J. W. (1990), Game Theory with Applications to Economics
       (Second Edition). New York: Oxford University Press. [8, 275]
Fudenberg, D. (1992), “Explaining Cooperation and Commitment in
       Repeated Games”, pp. 89–131 in Advances in Economic Theory,
       Volume I (J.-J. Laffont, ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press. [161]
Fudenberg, D., and D. K. Levine (1989), “Reputation and Equilibrium
       Selection in Games with a Patient Player”, Econometrica 57,
       759–778. [160]
Fudenberg, D., and E. S. Maskin (1986), “The Folk Theorem in Re-
       peated Games with Discounting or with Incomplete Information”,
       Econometrica 54, 533–554. [160, 254]
Fudenberg, D., and E. S. Maskin (1991), “On the Dispensability of Pub-
       lic Randomization in Discounted Repeated Games”, Journal of
       Economic Theory 53, 428–438. [160]
Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole (1991a), Game Theory. Cambridge, Mass.:
       MIT Press. [8]
Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole (1991b), “Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
       and Sequential Equilibrium”, Journal of Economic Theory 53,
       236–260. [254]
Gabay, D., and H. Moulin (1980), “On the Uniqueness and Stability of
       Nash-Equilibria in Noncooperative Games”, pp. 271–293 in Ap-
       plied Stochastic Control in Econometrics and Management Sci-
       ence (A. Bensoussan, P. Kleindorfer, and C. S. Tapiero, eds.),
       Amsterdam: North-Holland. [64]
Gale, D. (1953), “A Theory of N -Person Games with Perfect Informa-
       tion”, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
       United States of America 39, 496–501. [64]
Geanakoplos, J. (1992), “Common Knowledge”, Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 6, 53–82. [85]
References                                                           327



Geanakoplos, J. (1994), “Common Knowledge”, pp. 1437–1496 in Hand-
        book of Game Theory, Volume 2 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.),
        Amsterdam: North-Holland. [85]
Gibbard, A. (1973), “Manipulation of Voting Schemes: A General Re-
        sult”, Econometrica 41, 587–601. [195]
Gibbons, R. (1992), Game Theory for Applied Economists. Princeton:
        Princeton University Press. [8]
Gillies, D. B. (1959), “Solutions to General Non-Zero-Sum Games”,
        pp. 47–85 in Contributions to the Theory of Games, Volume IV
        (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 40) (A. W. Tucker and R. D.
        Luce, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press. [274]
Glazer, J., and C. A. Ma (1989), “Efficient Allocation of a ‘Prize’—
        King Solomon’s Dilemma”, Games and Economic Behavior 1,
        222–233. [195]
Glazer, J. and M. Perry (1996), “Virtual Implementation in Backwards
        Induction”, Games and Economic Behavior 15, 27–32. [195]
Glicksberg, I. L. (1952), “A Further Generalization of the Kakutani
        Fixed Point Theorem, with Application to Nash Equilibrium
        Points”, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society 3,
        170–174. [30, 33]
Green, J., and J.-J. Laffont (1977), “Characterization of Satisfactory
        Mechanisms for the Revelation of Preferences for Public Goods”,
        Econometrica 45, 427–438. [195]
Groves, T. (1973), “Incentives in Teams”, Econometrica 41, 617–631.
        [183]
Groves, T., and M. Loeb (1975), “Incentives and Public Inputs”, Journal
        of Public Economics 4, 211–226. [195]
Guilbaud, G. T. (1961), “Faut-il Jouer au Plus Fin? (Notes sur l’Histoire
        de la Théorie des Jeux)”, pp. 171–182 in La Décision, Paris:
        Éditions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. [51]
Gul, F. (1989), “Bargaining Foundations of Shapley Value”, Economet-
        rica 57, 81–95. [298]
Halpern, J. Y. (1986), “Reasoning about Knowledge: An Overview”,
        pp. 1–17 in Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning about Knowledge
        (J. Y. Halpern, ed.), Los Altos, California: Morgan Kaufmann.
        [85]
Harsanyi, J. C. (1963), “A Simplified Bargaining Model for the n-Person
        Cooperative Game”, International Economic Review 4, 194–220.
        [298]
328                                                            References



Harsanyi, J. C. (1967/68), “Games with Incomplete Information Played
        by ‘Bayesian’ Players, Parts I, II, and III”, Management Science
        14, 159–182, 320–334, and 486–502. [28, 30]
Harsanyi, J. C. (1973), “Games with Randomly Disturbed Payoffs: A
        New Rationale for Mixed-Strategy Equilibrium Points”, Interna-
        tional Journal of Game Theory 2, 1–23. [38, 41, 42, 51]
Harsanyi, J. C. (1974), “An Equilibrium-Point Interpretation of Sta-
        ble Sets and a Proposed Alternative Definition”, Management
        Science (Theory Series) 20, 1472–1495. [298]
Harsanyi, J. C. (1981), “The Shapley Value and the Risk-Dominance
        Solutions of Two Bargaining Models for Characteristic-Function
        Games”, pp. 43–68 in Essays in Game Theory and Mathematical
        Economics (R. J. Aumann, J. C. Harsanyi, W. Hildenbrand, M.
        Maschler, M. A. Perles, J. Rosenmüller, R. Selten, M. Shubik,
        and G. L. Thompson), Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut.
        [298]
Harsanyi, J. C., and R. Selten (1972), “A Generalized Nash Solution
        for Two-Person Bargaining Games with Incomplete Information”,
        Management Science 18, P-80–P-106. [312]
Hart, S. (1985), “An Axiomatization of Harsanyi’s Nontransferable Util-
        ity Solution”, Econometrica 53, 1295–1313. [298]
Hart, S., and A. Mas-Colell (1989), “Potential, Value, and Consistency”,
        Econometrica 57, 589–614. [297]
Hart, S. and A. Mas-Colell (1996), “Bargaining and Value”, Economet-
        rica 64, 357–380. [296, 297, 298]
Hendon, E., H. J. Jacobsen, and B. Sloth (1996), “The One-Shot-Devi-
        ation Principle for Sequential Rationality” Games and Economic
        Behavior 12, 274–282. [254]
Hintikka, J. (1962), Knowledge and Belief. Ithaca: Cornell University
        Press. [84]
Hotelling, H. (1929), “Stability in Competition”, Economic Journal 39,
        41–57. [30]
Howard, J. V. (1992), “A Social Choice Rule and Its Implementation in
        Perfect Equilibrium”, Journal of Economic Theory 56, 142–159.
        [312]
Isbell, J. R. (1957), “Finitary Games”, pp. 79–96 in Contributions to the
        Theory of Games, Volume III (Annals of Mathematics Studies,
        39) (M. Dresher, A. W. Tucker, and P. Wolfe, eds.), Princeton:
        Princeton University Press. [218]
References                                                          329



Kakutani, S. (1941), “A Generalization of Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theo-
       rem”, Duke Mathematical Journal 8, 457–459. [19]
Kalai, E. (1977), “Nonsymmetric Nash Solutions and Replications of
       2-Person Bargaining”, International Journal of Game Theory 6,
       129–133. [312]
Kalai, E. (1985), “Solutions to the Bargaining Problem”, pp. 77–105 in
       Social Goals and Social Organization (L. Hurwicz, D. Schmeidler,
       and H. Sonnenschein, eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press. [312]
Kalai, E., and M. Smorodinsky (1975), “Other Solutions to Nash’s
       Bargaining Problem”, Econometrica 43, 513–518. [312]
Kihlstrom, R. E., A. E. Roth, and D. Schmeidler (1981), “Risk Aver-
       sion and Solutions to Nash’s Bargaining Problem”, pp. 65–71 in
       Game Theory and Mathematical Economics (O. Moeschlin and
       D. Pallaschke, eds.), Amsterdam: North-Holland. [312]
Kohlberg, E. (1990), “Refinement of Nash Equilibrium: The Main
       Ideas”, pp. 3–45 in Game Theory and Applications (T. Ichiishi,
       A. Neyman, and Y. Tauman, eds.), San Diego: Academic Press.
       [254]
Kohlberg, E., and J.-F. Mertens (1986), “On the Strategic Stability of
       Equilibria”, Econometrica 54, 1003–1037. [115, 254]
Kohlberg, E., and P. J. Reny (1997), “Independence on Relative Proba-
       bility Spaces and Consistent Assessments in Game Trees”, Jour-
       nal of Economic Theory 75, 280–313. [254]
Krelle, W. (1976), Preistheorie (Part 2). Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr (Paul
       Siebeck). [131]
Kreps, D. M. (1988), Notes on the Theory of Choice. Boulder: Westview
       Press. [8]
Kreps, D. M. (1990a), A Course in Microeconomic Theory. Princeton:
       Princeton University Press. [8, 225]
Kreps, D. M. (1990b), Game Theory and Economic Modelling. Oxford:
       Clarendon Press. [8, 254]
Kreps, D. M., and G. Ramey (1987), “Structural Consistency, Consis-
       tency, and Sequential Rationality”, Econometrica 55, 1331–1348.
       [254]
Kreps, D. M., and R. B. Wilson (1982a), “Reputation and Imperfect
       Information”, Journal of Economic Theory 27, 253–279. [115,
       254]
Kreps, D. M., and R. B. Wilson (1982b), “Sequential Equilibria”, Econo-
       metrica 50, 863–894. [252, 254]
330                                                           References



Krishna, V. (1989), “The Folk Theorems for Repeated Games”, Working
       Paper 89-003, Division of Research, Harvard Business School.
       [159, 161]
Krishna, V., and R. Serrano (1995), “Perfect Equilibria of a Model of
       N -Person Noncooperative Bargaining”, International Journal of
       Game Theory 24, 259–272. [296]
Kuhn, H. W. (1950), “Extensive Games”, Proceedings of the National
       Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 36, 570–576.
       [114, 115, 217, 218]
Kuhn, H. W. (1953), “Extensive Games and the Problem of Informa-
       tion”, pp. 193–216 in Contributions to the Theory of Games, Vol-
       ume II (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 28) (H. W. Kuhn and
       A. W. Tucker, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press. [114,
       115, 217, 218]
Kuhn, H. W. (1968), “Preface” to “Waldegrave’s Comments: Excerpt
       from Montmort’s Letter to Nicholas Bernoulli”, pp. 3–6 in Pre-
       cursors in Mathematical Economics: An Anthology (Series of
       Reprints of Scarce Works on Political Economy, 19) (W. J. Bau-
       mol and S. M. Goldfeld, eds.), London: London School of Eco-
       nomics and Political Science. [30, 51]
Lewis, D. K. (1969), Convention. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
       [84]
Littlewood, J. E. (1953), A Mathematician’s Miscellany. London:
       Methuen. [71, 85]
Lucas, W. F. (1969), “The Proof That a Game May Not Have a Solu-
       tion”, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 137,
       219–229. [279]
Lucas, W. F. (1992), “Von Neumann–Morgenstern Stable Sets”, pp. 543–
       590 in Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications,
       Volume 1 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.), Amsterdam: North-
       Holland. [298]
Luce, R. D., and H. Raiffa (1957), Games and Decisions. New York:
       John Wiley and Sons. [8, 15, 30, 64, 65, 160, 275, 293]
Madrigal, V., T. C. C. Tan, and S. R. da C. Werlang (1987), “Sup-
       port Restrictions and Sequential Equilibria”, Journal of Eco-
       nomic Theory 43, 329–334. [254]
Maschler, M. (1976), “An Advantage of the Bargaining Set over the
       Core”, Journal of Economic Theory 13, 184–192. [297]
References                                                         331



Maschler, M. (1992), “The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus”,
      pp. 591–667 in Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Appli-
      cations, Volume 1 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.), Amsterdam:
      North-Holland. [298]
Maschler, M., and G. Owen (1989), “The Consistent Shapley Value for
      Hyperplane Games”, International Journal of Game Theory 18,
      389–407. [298]
Maschler, M., and G. Owen (1992), “The Consistent Shapley Value for
      Games without Side Payments”, pp. 5–12 in Rational Interaction
      (R. Selten, ed.), Berlin: Springer-Verlag. [298]
Maskin, E. S. (1985), “The Theory of Implementation in Nash Equilib-
      rium: A Survey”, pp. 173–204 in Social Goals and Social Organi-
      zation (L. Hurwicz, D. Schmeidler, and H. Sonnenschein, eds.),
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [195]
Maynard Smith, J. (1972), “Game Theory and the Evolution of Fight-
      ing”, pp. 8–28 in On Evolution (J. Maynard Smith), Edinburgh:
      Edinburgh University Press. [51]
Maynard Smith, J. (1974), “The Theory of Games and the Evolution of
      Animal Conflicts”, Journal of Theoretical Biology 47, 209–221.
      [30, 51]
Maynard Smith, J. (1982), Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cam-
      bridge: Cambridge University Press. [51]
Maynard Smith, J., and G. R. Price (1973), “The Logic of Animal
      Conflict”, Nature 246, 15–18. [51]
Mertens, J.-F. (1995), “Two Examples of Strategic Equilibrium”, Games
      and Economic Behavior 8, 378–388. [254]
Mertens, J.-F., and S. Zamir (1985), “Formulation of Bayesian Analysis
      for Games with Incomplete Information”, International Journal
      of Game Theory 14, 1–29. [29]
Milgrom, P. R., and D. J. Roberts (1982), “Predation, Reputation, and
      Entry Deterrence”, Journal of Economic Theory 27, 280–312.
      [115, 254]
Milgrom, P. R., and D. J. Roberts (1990), “Rationalizability, Learning,
      and Equilibrium in Games with Strategic Complementarities”,
      Econometrica 58, 1255–1277. [65]
Milgrom, P. R., and N. Stokey (1982), “Information, Trade and Common
      Knowledge”, Journal of Economic Theory 26, 17–27. [85]
Milnor, J. W., and L. S. Shapley (1978), “Values of Large Games II:
      Oceanic Games”, Mathematics of Operations Research 3, 290–
      307. [297]
332                                                          References



Moore, J. (1992), “Implementation, Contracts, and Renegotiation in
       Environments with Complete Information”, pp. 182–282 in Ad-
       vances in Economic Theory, Volume I (J.-J. Laffont, ed.), Cam-
       bridge: Cambridge University Press. [196]
Moore, J., and R. Repullo (1988), “Subgame Perfect Implementation”,
       Econometrica 56, 1191–1220. [196]
Moulin, H. (1979), “Dominance Solvable Voting Schemes”, Economet-
       rica 47, 1337–1351. [64, 65]
Moulin, H. (1984), “Dominance Solvability and Cournot Stability”,
       Mathematical Social Sciences 7, 83–102. [64]
Moulin, H. (1986), Game Theory for the Social Sciences (Second Edi-
       tion). New York: New York University Press. [8, 52, 64, 115,
       275]
Moulin, H. (1988), Axioms of Cooperative Decision Making. Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press. [275, 297, 298]
Muller, E., and M. A. Satterthwaite (1977), “The Equivalence of Strong
       Positive Association and Strategy-Proofness”, Journal of Eco-
       nomic Theory 14, 412–418. [189]
Muthoo, A. (1991), “A Note on Bargaining over a Finite Number of
       Feasible Agreements”, Economic Theory 1, 290–292. [131]
Myerson, R. B. (1977), “Graphs and Cooperation in Games”, Mathe-
       matics of Operations Research 2, 225–229. [297]
Myerson, R. B. (1978), “Refinements of the Nash Equilibrium Concept”,
       International Journal of Game Theory 7, 73–80. [254]
Myerson, R. B. (1980), “Conference Structures and Fair Allocation
       Rules”, International Journal of Game Theory 9, 169–182. [297]
Myerson, R. B. (1991), Game Theory. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Har-
       vard University Press. [8, 275, 293]
Nash, J. F. (1950a), “Equilibrium Points in N -Person Games”, Proceed-
       ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
       America 36, 48–49. [29, 30, 51]
Nash, J. F. (1950b), “The Bargaining Problem”, Econometrica 18, 155–
       162. [312]
Nash, J. F. (1951), “Non-Cooperative Games”, Annals of Mathematics
       54, 286–295. [30, 51]
Neyman, A. (1985), “Bounded Complexity Justifies Cooperation in the
       Finitely Repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma”, Economic Letters 19,
       227–229. [175]
Nikaidô, H., and K. Isoda (1955), “Note on Noncooperative Convex
       Games”, Pacific Journal of Mathematics 5, 807–815. [30]
References                                                         333



Osborne, M. J. (1990), “Signaling, Forward Induction, and Stability
       in Finitely Repeated Games”, Journal of Economic Theory 50,
       22–36. [115]
Osborne, M. J., and A. Rubinstein (1990), Bargaining and Markets. San
       Diego: Academic Press. [129, 131, 236]
Owen, G. (1982), Game Theory (Second Edition). New York: Academic
       Press. [275]
Pearce, D. G. (1984), “Rationalizable Strategic Behavior and the Prob-
       lem of Perfection”, Econometrica 52, 1029–1050. [64]
Pearce, D. G. (1992), “Repeated Games: Cooperation and Rationality”,
       pp. 132–174 in Advances in Economic Theory, Volume I (J.-J.
       Laffont, ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [161]
Peleg, B. (1963a), “Bargaining Sets of Cooperative Games without Side
       Payments”, Israel Journal of Mathematics 1, 197–200. [298]
                                                                   (i)
Peleg, B. (1963b), “Existence Theorem for the Bargaining Set M1 ”,
       Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 69, 109–110. [297]
                                                                   (i)
Peleg, B. (1967), “Existence Theorem for the Bargaining Set M1 ”,
       pp. 53–56 in Essays in Mathematical Economics (M. Shubik, ed.),
       Princeton: Princeton University Press. [297]
Peleg, B. (1968), “On Weights of Constant-Sum Majority Games”, SIAM
       Journal on Applied Mathematics 16, 527–532. [297]
Peleg, B. (1992), “Axiomatizations of the Core”, pp. 397–412 in Hand-
       book of Game Theory with Economic Applications, Volume 1
       (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.), Amsterdam: North-Holland.
       [275]
Piccione, M. (1992), “Finite Automata Equilibria with Discounting”,
       Journal of Economic Theory 56, 180–193. [175]
Piccione, M., and A. Rubinstein (1993), “Finite Automata Play a Re-
       peated Extensive Game”, Journal of Economic Theory 61, 160–
       168. [175]
Postlewaite, A., and R. W. Rosenthal (1974), “Disadvantageous Syndi-
       cates”, Journal of Economic Theory 9, 324–326. [275]
Radner, R. (1980), “Collusive Behavior in Noncooperative Epsilon-
       Equilibria of Oligopolies with Long but Finite Lives”, Journal
       of Economic Theory 22, 136–154. [115]
Radner, R. (1986), “Can Bounded Rationality Resolve the Prisoners’
       Dilemma?”, pp. 387–399 in Contributions to Mathematical Eco-
       nomics (W. Hildenbrand and A. Mas-Colell, eds.), Amsterdam:
       North-Holland. [115]
334                                                          References



Raiffa, H. (1992), “Game Theory at the University of Michigan, 1948–
       1952”, pp. 165–175 in Toward a History of Game Theory (E. R.
       Weintraub, ed.), Durham: Duke University Press. [30]
Rapoport, A. (1987), “Prisoner’s Dilemma”, pp. 973–976 in The New
       Palgrave, Volume 3 (J. Eatwell, M. Milgate, and P. Newman,
       eds.), London: Macmillan. [135]
Reny, P. J. (1992), “Backward Induction, Normal Form Perfection and
       Explicable Equilibria”, Econometrica 60, 627–649. [115]
Reny, P. J. (1993), “Common Belief and the Theory of Games with
       Perfect Information”, Journal of Economic Theory 59, 257–274.
       [115]
Repullo, R. (1987), “A Simple Proof of Maskin’s Theorem on Nash
       Implementation”, Social Choice and Welfare 4, 39–41. [195]
Robinson, J. (1951), “An Iterative Method of Solving a Game”, Annals
       of Mathematics 54, 296–301. [52]
Rockafellar, R. T. (1970), Convex Analysis. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
       versity Press. [263, 274]
Roemer, J. E. (1988), “Axiomatic Bargaining Theory on Economic En-
       vironments”, Journal of Economic Theory 45, 1–31. [312]
Rosenthal, R. W. (1979), “Sequences of Games with Varying Oppo-
       nents”, Econometrica 47, 1353–1366. [51]
Rosenthal, R. W. (1981), “Games of Perfect Information, Predatory
       Pricing and the Chain-Store Paradox”, Journal of Economic The-
       ory 25, 92–100. [115]
Roth, A. E. (1977), “Individual Rationality and Nash’s Solution to the
       Bargaining Problem”, Mathematics of Operations Research 2,
       64–65. [309, 312]
Roth, A. E. (1979), Axiomatic Models of Bargaining. Berlin: Springer-
       Verlag. [312]
Roth, A. E., and R. E. Verrecchia (1979), “The Shapley Value as Applied
       to Cost Allocation: A Reinterpretation”, Journal of Accounting
       Research 17, 295–303. [297]
Rubinstein, A. (1979), “Equilibrium in Supergames with the Overtaking
       Criterion”, Journal of Economic Theory 21, 1–9. [160]
Rubinstein, A. (1982), “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model”,
       Econometrica 50, 97–109. [131]
Rubinstein, A. (1986), “Finite Automata Play the Repeated Prisoner’s
       Dilemma”, Journal of Economic Theory 39, 83–96. [175]
References                                                        335



Rubinstein, A. (1989), “The Electronic Mail Game: Strategic Behav-
       ior Under ‘Almost Common Knowledge’ ”, American Economic
       Review 79, 385–391. [84]
Rubinstein, A. (1991), “Comments on the Interpretation of Game The-
       ory”, Econometrica 59, 909–924. [51, 115]
Rubinstein, A. (1994), “Equilibrium in Supergames”, pp. 17–27 in Es-
       says in Game Theory (N. Megiddo, ed.), New York: Springer-
       Verlag. [160]
Rubinstein, A. (1995), “On the Interpretation of Two Theoretical Mod-
       els of Bargaining”, pp. 120–130 in Barriers to Conflict Resolu-
       tion (K. J. Arrow, R. H. Mnookin, L. Ross, A. Tversky, and
       R. B. Wilson, eds.), New York: Norton. [131]
Rubinstein, A., Z. Safra, and W. Thomson (1992), “On the Interpre-
       tation of the Nash Bargaining Solution and Its Extension to
       Non-Expected Utility Preferences”, Econometrica 60, 1171–1186.
       [312]
Rubinstein, A., and A. Wolinsky (1994), “Rationalizable Conjectural
       Equilibrium: Between Nash and Rationalizability”, Games and
       Economic Behavior 6, 299–311. [64–65]
Samet, D. (1990), “Ignoring Ignorance and Agreeing to Disagree”, Jour-
       nal of Economic Theory 52, 190–207. [85]
Satterthwaite, M. A. (1975), “Strategy-Proofness and Arrow’s Condi-
       tions: Existence and Correspondence Theorems for Voting Pro-
       cedures and Social Welfare Functions”, Journal of Economic The-
       ory 10, 187–217. [195]
Savage, L. J. (1972), The Foundations of Statistics (Second Revised
       Edition). New York: Dover. [5]
Scarf, H. E. (1967), “The Core of an N Person Game”, Econometrica
       35, 50–69. [269, 275]
Schelling, T. C. (1960), The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge, Mass.:
       Harvard University Press. [8]
Schmeidler, D. (1969), “The Nucleolus of a Characteristic Function
       Game”, SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 17, 1163–1170.
       [297]
Schmeidler, D., and H. Sonnenschein (1978), “Two Proofs of the
       Gibbard–Satterthwaite Theorem on the Possibility of a Strategy-
       Proof Social Choice Function”, pp. 227–234 in Decision Theory
       and Social Ethics (H. W. Gottinger and W. Leinfellner, eds.),
       Dordrecht: D. Reidel. [195]
336                                                              References



Selten, R. (1965), “Spieltheoretische Behandlung eines Oligopolmod-
       ells mit Nachfrageträgheit”, Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswis-
       senschaft 121, 301–324 and 667–689. [114]
Selten, R. (1975), “Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for Equi-
       librium Points in Extensive Games”, International Journal of
       Game Theory 4, 25–55. [254]
Selten, R. (1978), “The Chain Store Paradox”, Theory and Decision 9,
       127–159. [115]
Sen, A. (1986), “Social Choice Theory”, pp. 1073–1181 in Handbook
       of Mathematical Economics, Volume 3 (K. J. Arrow and M. D.
       Intriligator, eds.), Amsterdam: North-Holland. [182]
Shaked, A. (1994), “Opting Out: Bazaars versus ‘Hi Tech’ Markets”,
       Investigaciones Económicas 18, 421–432. [129]
Shaked, A., and J. Sutton (1984a), “Involuntary Unemployment as a
       Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model”, Econometrica 52,
       1351–1364. [131]
Shaked, A., and J. Sutton (1984b), “The Semi-Walrasian Economy”,
       Discussion Paper 84/98 (Theoretical Economics), International
       Centre for Economics and Related Disciplines, London School of
       Economics. [131]
Shapley, L. S. (1953), “A Value for n-Person Games”, pp. 307–317 in
       Contributions to the Theory of Games, Volume II (Annals of
       Mathematics Studies, 28) (H. W. Kuhn and A. W. Tucker, eds.),
       Princeton: Princeton University Press. [297]
Shapley, L. S. (1959), “The Solutions of a Symmetric Market Game”,
       pp. 145–162 in Contributions to the Theory of Games, Volume
       IV (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 40) (A. W. Tucker and
       R. D. Luce, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press. [274,
       275]
Shapley, L. S. (1964), “Some Topics in Two-Person Games”, pp. 1–28 in
       Advances in Game Theory (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 52)
       (M. Dresher, L. S. Shapley, and A. W. Tucker, eds.), Princeton:
       Princeton University Press. [52]
Shapley, L. S. (1967), “On Balanced Sets and Cores”, Naval Research
       Logistics Quarterly 14, 453–460. [274]
Shapley, L. S. (1969), “Utility Comparison and the Theory of Games”,
       pp. 251–263 in La Décision, Paris: Éditions du Centre National
       de la Recherche Scientifique. (Reprinted on pp. 307–319 of The
       Shapley Value (Alvin E. Roth, ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
       versity Press, 1988.) [298]
References                                                          337



Shapley, L. S. (1971/72), “Cores of Convex Games”, International Jour-
        nal of Game Theory 1, 11–26. (See also p. 199.) [275, 297]
Shapley, L. S. (1973), “On Balanced Games without Side Payments”,
        pp. 261–290 in Mathematical Programming (T. C. Hu and S. M.
        Robinson, eds.), New York: Academic Press. [269, 275]
Shapley, L. S., and M. Shubik (1953), “Solutions of N -Person Games
        with Ordinal Utilities”, Econometrica 21, 348–349. (Abstract of
        a paper presented at a conference.) [275]
Shapley, L. S., and M. Shubik (1967), “Ownership and the Production
        Function”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 81, 88–111. [275]
Shapley, L. S., and M. Shubik (1969a), “On Market Games”, Journal of
        Economic Theory 1, 9–25. [274]
Shapley, L. S., and M. Shubik (1969b), “On the Core of an Economic
        System with Externalities”, American Economic Review 59, 678–
        684. [275]
Shubik, M. (1959a), “Edgeworth Market Games”, pp. 267–278 in Con-
        tributions to the Theory of Games, Volume IV (Annals of Mathe-
        matics Studies, 40) (A. W. Tucker and R. D. Luce, eds.), Prince-
        ton: Princeton University Press. [274, 275]
Shubik, M. (1959b), Strategy and Market Structure. New York: Wiley.
        [160]
Shubik, M. (1962), “Incentives, Decentralized Control, the Assignment
        of Joint Costs and Internal Pricing”, Management Science 8, 325–
        343. [297]
Shubik, M. (1982), Game Theory in the Social Sciences. Cambridge,
        Mass.: MIT Press. [8, 275]
Sorin, S. (1990), “Supergames”, pp. 43–63 in Game Theory and Applica-
        tions (T. Ichiishi, A. Neyman, and Y. Tauman, eds.), San Diego:
        Academic Press. [161]
Sorin, S. (1992), “Repeated Games with Complete Information”, pp. 71–
        107 in Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications,
        Volume 1 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.), Amsterdam: North-
        Holland. [161]
Spence, A. M. (1974), Market Signaling. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
        University Press. [237]
Spohn, W. (1982), “How to Make Sense of Game Theory”, pp. 239–270
        in Philosophy of Economics (W. Stegmüller, W. Balzer, and W.
        Spohn, eds.), Berlin: Springer-Verlag. [64, 84]
Ståhl, I. (1972), Bargaining Theory. Stockholm: Economics Research
        Institute at the Stockholm School of Economics. [131]
338                                                          References



Thompson, F. B. (1952), “Equivalence of Games in Extensive Form”,
       Research Memorandum RM-759, U.S. Air Force Project Rand,
       Rand Corporation, Santa Monica, California. (Reprinted on
       pp. 36–45 of Classics in Game Theory (Harold W. Kuhn, ed.),
       Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997.) [209, 217]
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman (1986), “Rational Choice and the Fram-
       ing of Decisions”, Journal of Business 59, S251–S278. [209]
Van Damme, E. (1983), Refinements of the Nash Equilibrium Con-
       cept (Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems,
       Vol. 219). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. [64]
Van Damme, E. (1989), “Stable Equilibria and Forward Induction”,
       Journal of Economic Theory 48, 476–496. [115]
Van Damme, E. (1991), Stability and Perfection of Nash Equilibria
       (Second Edition). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. [8, 52]
Van Damme, E. (1992), “Refinements of Nash Equilibrium”, pp. 32–75
       in Advances in Economic Theory, Volume I (J.-J. Laffont, ed.),
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [254]
Van Damme, E., R. Selten, and E. Winter (1990), “Alternating Bid
       Bargaining with a Smallest Money Unit”, Games and Economic
       Behavior 2, 188–201. [131]
Varian, H. R. (1992), Microeconomic Analysis (Third Edition). New
       York: Norton. [275]
Vickrey, W. (1961), “Counterspeculation, Auctions, and Competitive
       Sealed Tenders”, Journal of Finance 16, 8–37. [30]
Vives, X. (1990), “Nash Equilibrium with Strategic Complementarities”,
       Journal of Mathematical Economics 19, 305–321. [65]
von Neumann, J. (1928), “Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele”, Mathe-
       matische Annalen 100, 295–320. (Translated as “On the Theory
       of Games of Strategy”, pp. 13–42 in Contributions to the The-
       ory of Games, Volume IV (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 40)
       (A. W. Tucker and R. D. Luce, eds.), Princeton University Press,
       Princeton, 1959.) [29, 30, 51]
von Neumann, J., and O. Morgenstern (1944), Theory of Games and
       Economic Behavior. New York: John Wiley and Sons. [5, 8, 9,
       30, 114, 274, 279, 297]
Zamir, S. (1992), “Repeated Games of Incomplete Information: Zero-
       Sum”, pp. 109–154 in Handbook of Game Theory with Economic
       Applications, Volume 1 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.), Ams-
       terdam: North-Holland. [161]
References                                                      339



Zemel, E. (1989), “Small Talk and Cooperation: A Note on Bounded
      Rationality”, Journal of Economic Theory 49, 1–9. [175]
Zeuthen, F. (1930), Problems of Monopoly and Economic Warfare. Lon-
      don: George Routledge and Sons. [312]
Index




Page numbers in boldface indicate pages on which objects are defined; as in the text,
the symbols y, , , and ? indicate definitions, results, examples, and exercises
respectively.

A                                           Auction,  18.1
                                             first price, ? 18.2
Action
                                             second price, ? 18.3
 extensive game with imperfect
                                               imperfect information,  27.1
    information, y 200.1
                                            Automaton, see machine
 extensive game with perfect
                                            Axiomatizations of the core, 275
    information, y 89.1
                                            Axioms
 strategic game, 11
                                             for knowledge function, 69–70
Action-determined beliefs, y 232.1
                                             for Nash solution, 305–307
ADD (Shapley value axiom), 292
                                             for Shapley value, 292
Addition of a superfluous move
 equivalence of extensive games, 206
                                            B
Additive coalitional game, ? 261.2
Additivity axiom of Shapley value, 292      Bach or Stravinsky?,  15.3
Agent strategic form, 250                    Bayesian game, ? 27.2
Agree to disagree, 75                        correlated equilibrium, 44,  46.1
Agreements, set of                           interpretation of mixed equilibrium, 40
 bargaining game, 118                        mixed extension,  34.1
 Nash solution, y 300.1                      Nash equilibrium,  15.3
Air strike, ? 36.2                           with outside option,  110.1
Allocation                                  Backwards induction, 99
 competitive, 269                           Balanced contributions property for
 market with transferable payoff, 264           coalitional games, y 291.1
Alternating offers bargaining, see          Balanced game/collection of weights,
    bargaining game of alternating              262
    offers                                  Balancing counterobjection, see
Approachable mixed strategy                     counterobjection
    equilibrium, 42                         Bargaining game of alternating offers,
Armies, ? 101.3                                 120
Assessment, 221, y 222.1                     constant cost of delay, ? 125.2
 consistent, y 224.2                         equilibria with delay, ? 125.2
Asymmetric abilities/perceptions, 6          importance of procedure, 127
Asymmetric Nash solution, 309                more than two players, 130
342                                                                          Index



Bargaining game of alternating offers     Best response to belief
    (continued)                            action not strictly dominated, 60.1
 multiple equilibrium outcomes,            action not weakly dominated, ? 64.2
     ? 125.2, ? 128.1                     Biological example,  49.2, 49
 Nash equilibria, 121                     Bondareva–Shapley theorem, 262.1
 and Nash solution, 310–311               BoS, see Bach or Stravinsky?
 opting out, 128                          Bounded rationality, 6, 164
 pie with discrete elements, ? 128.1      Breakdown in bargaining, 129
 properties of subgame perfect            Burning money game,  111.1
    equilibria, 125
 risk of breakdown, 129                   C
   relation with Nash solution, 310.3     Card game, ? 217.3
 subgame perfect equilibria, 121–127      Centipede game, 106
   characterization, 122.1                Chain-store game, 105
 variant for coalitional game, ? 296.1     perturbation,  239.1
 variant with one party proposing,        Chance moves in extensive game
     ? 127.1                               imperfect information, 201
 variant with simultaneous proposals,      perfect information, 101
    127                                   Chess, 6, 100
Bargaining problem (Nash), y 300.1        Chicken, 30
Bargaining set of coalitional game,       Choice rule/function, 178
    y 282.1                                monotonic, y 186.1
 and kernel, 285.1                         no veto power, y 187.1
Bargaining solution, y 301.1, 308         Choice theory, 4
 Nash, y 301.2                            Choice under uncertainty, 4, ? 71.2
Battle of the sexes, see Bach or          Clarke–Groves game forms, 183
    Stravinsky?                           Coalescing of moves
Bayesian extensive game, y 231.1           equivalence of extensive games, 207
 perfect Bayesian equilibrium, y 232.1     sequential equilibrium,  226.2
Bayesian game, y 25.1                      trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
                                               ? 252.2
 common prior belief, 75
 extensive with observable actions,       Coalition, y 257.1
    y 231.1                               Coalitional game
                                           nontransferable payoff, y 268.2
 Nash equilibrium, y 26.1
                                             bargaining set, kernel, 284, 298
 signaling game, 237
                                             core, y 268.3
Beer or Quiche,  244.2
                                             exchange economy, 269
Behavioral strategy, y 212.1
                                             Shapley value, 298
 completely mixed, 224
                                           solutions, see solution
 Nash equilibrium, 216                     transferable payoff, y 257.1
 outcome-equivalence with mixed              balanced, 262
    strategy, 214                            balanced contributions property,
Belief system, 223                             y 291.1
Beliefs                                      bargaining set, y 282.1
 constraints in extensive game               cohesive, y 258.1
   common beliefs, 222                       convex, ? 260.4
   consistency with strategies, 221          core, y 258.2
   structural consistency, 222, y 228.1      cost-sharing, 296
 mixed strategies, 43                        excess of a coalition, 283
 rationalizability, 54                       feasible payoff vector/profile, 258
Best response function, 15                   imputation, 278
Index                                                                         343



Coalitional game                            market with transferable payoff, 267
 transferable payoff (continued)           Convex coalitional game, ? 260.4
   kernel, y 284.1                          core and Shapley value, ? 295.5
   nonemptiness of bargaining set and      Convexity of Nash bargaining problem,
     kernel, 288.3                             y 300.1
   nonemptiness of nucleolus, 288.1        Cooperative game, see coalitional game
   nonempty core, 262.1                    Coordinated attack problem, 85
   nucleolus, y 286.1                      Coordination game,  16.1
   objection, see objection,               Core
     counterobjection                       convergence to competitive
   Shapley value, y 291.2                      equilibrium, 267, 273.1
   simple, ? 261.1                          equal treatment in, 272.2
   stable set, y 279.1                      exchange economy, 271
   superadditive, 258                         and competitive equilibrium, 271–274
   zerosum, ? 261.2                         and generalized stable set, ? 280.5
Coalitional vs. noncooperative games, 2,    market with transferable payoff, 264
     255                                      and competitive equilibrium, 265–268
Cohesive coalitional game, y 258.1          nontransferable payoff game, y 268.3
Common beliefs, 222                         and stable sets, 279.2
Common knowledge, y 73.1, y 73.2            transferable payoff game, y 258.2
Communication, 113                            nonemptiness, 262.1
Comparative statics of risk aversion in    Correlated equilibrium, y 45.1
     Nash bargaining, 304.1                 knowledge, ? 81.1
Competitive equilibrium                     rationalizability, 56.2
 exchange economy, 269                     Cost-sharing in coalitional game, 296
   and core, 271–274                       Counterobjection in coalitional game
   existence, 270                           bargaining set, 281
 and game theory, 3                         kernel, 284
 market with transferable payoff, 266       Nash solution, 302
   and core, 265–268                        nucleolus, 286
   existence, ? 267.2                       Shapley value, 290
Competitive payoff, 266                    Cournot duopoly
Completely mixed strategy, 224              rationalizability, ? 56.4
Complexity of machine, 165                 Covariance with positive affine
Concave function, 7                            transformations (Nash solution),
                                               ? 309.1
Consequences, set of
 coalitional game, y 268.2                 Crazy players, 239
                                           Credible objection in coalitional game,
 implementation theory, 178
                                               278
 strategic game, 12
                                           Cycling phase of machine game, 171
Consistency
 of beliefs with strategies, 221
                                           D
 of strategy with history, 213
 structural, y 228.1                       Deductive interpretation, 5
Consistent assessment, y 224.2             Dictatorial choice rule, 181
 and structural consistency, 228–231       Disagreement outcome in Nash solution,
Constituent game of repeated game, 136         y 300.1
Constraints on beliefs, 221–222            Discounting
Continuous preference relation, 7           bargaining game of alternating offers,
Convergence of core and competitive            119, 122,  125.1
     equilibrium                            Nash folk theorem, 145.2
 exchange economy, 273.1                    perfect folk theorem, 151.1
344                                                                          Index



Discounting (continued)                    Event, 69
 preferences, 137                           self-evident, y 73.2
 repeated game, 139                        Evolutionarily stable strategy, y 49.1
 structure of subgame perfect equilibria    existence, ? 51.1
    of repeated game, 153–154              Evolutionary equilibrium, 48
Dominance solvable, ? 63.2                 Evolutive interpretation, 5
Dominant action, ? 18.3                    Excess of a coalition, 283
Dominant strategy equilibrium of           Exchange economy, 269
    strategic game, y 181.1                 core, 271
Dominated action, see weakly               Exchange game (Bayesian), ? 28.1
    dominated action, strictly             Existence
    dominated action                        evolutionarily stable strategy, ? 51.1
Dove, see hawk                              mixed strategy equilibrium, 33.1, 33
DSE (dominant strategy equilibrium),        Nash equilibrium, 20.3
    y 181.1                                 sequential equilibrium, 253.2
DUM (Shapley value), 292                    subgame perfect equilibrium, 99.2
Dummy player in coalitional game,           trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
    ? 280.4                                      249.1, 253.2
 axiom of Shapley value, 292               Exogenous uncertainty in extensive
Dynamic adjustment process, 52                  game
                                            imperfect information, 200
E                                           perfect information, 101
Edgeworth box, 270                         Extensive game, y 200.1
Education, Spence’s model,  237.2          behavioral strategy, y 212.1
  refinement of equilibria,  246.1         chance moves, 101, 201
Eductive interpretation, 5                  equivalence principles
Efficiency in coalitional game, 290           addition of superfluous move, 206
  Pareto (Nash solution), 305                 coalescing of moves, 207
Efficient agreement (bargaining), 122,        inflation–deflation, 205
     125                                      interchange of moves, 208
Electronic mail game, 81–84                 exogenous uncertainty, 101, 200
Elimination of dominated actions, see       imperfect information, y 200.1
     iterated elimination                   machine game, ? 174.1
Endowment in market, 264                    mixed strategy, y 212.1
Enforceable payoff profile/outcome, 143     outcome, 213, 223
Environment (implementation theory),        perfect and imperfect recall, y 203.3
     179                                    perfect Bayesian equilibrium, y 232.1
-equilibrium, ? 108.1                      perfect information, y 89.1
Equal treatment in core, 272.2                Nash equilibrium, y 93.1
Equilibrium, see solution                     no indifference condition, ? 100.2
Equilibrium, competitive, 266                 outcome, 93
Equivalence of extensive games                reduced strategic form, y 95.1
  coalescing of moves, 207                    simultaneous moves, 102
  framing effects, 209                        strategic form, y 94.1
  inflation–deflation, 205                    strategy, y 92.1
  interchange of moves, 208                   subgame, y 97.1
  one-player games, ? 208.1                   subgame perfect equilibrium, y 97.2
  superfluous moves, 206                    pure strategy, y 203.1
Equivalence of mixed and behavioral         sequential equilibrium, see sequential
     strategies, 214                            equilibrium
ESS (evolutionarily stable strategy), 50    simultaneous moves, 202
Index                                                                          345



Extensive game (continued)                 Hawk–Dove,  16.3,  49.2
 solutions, see solution                   History in extensive game
 vs. strategic game, 3                      imperfect information, y 200.1
 trembling hand perfect equilibrium,        perfect information, y 89.1
    y 251.1                                Homogeneous weighted majority game,
Extensive game form with perfect               ? 289.2

    information, 90, 179
External stability in coalitional game,    I
    y 279.1
                                           I IA (Nash solution axiom), 306
                                           Impatience in bargaining game, 126
F
                                           Imperfect information
Feasible payoff profile                      extensive game, y 200.1
 coalitional game, 258                       strategic game, 24
 strategic game, 139                       Imperfect information in game models,
Fictitious play, 52                             199
Finite extensive game, 90                  Imperfect recall, 203
Finite horizon extensive game, 90          Implementable choice rule, y 179.1
 examples, 105                             Implementation theory, 177–196
Finite strategic game, 11                    dominant strategy implementation,
Finitely repeated game, 155                     180–185
 Nash equilibrium, 155–157                   Nash implementation, 185–191
 Nash folk theorem, 156.1                    and Nash solution, 311
 perfect folk theorem, 159.1                 subgame perfect equilibrium, 191–195
 subgame perfect equilibrium, 157–160        virtual SPE-implementation, 192
First mover advantage in bargaining        Imputation, 278
    game, 126                              Increasing function, 7
First price auction, ? 18.2                Independence of irrelevant alternatives
Fixed point theorem, 20.1                       (Nash solution), 306, ? 309.1
Folk theorem, see Nash folk theorem,       Individually rational
    perfect folk theorem                     see enforceable, 143
Forget, players who do so, 204               strict (Nash solution), ? 309.2
Forward induction, 110–114                 Indivisible good, market for
Framing effects, 209                         core,  260.1
Full dimensionality in repeated game,        Shapley value,  294.4
    151                                      stable set, ? 280.2
                                           Infinitely repeated game, y 137.1
G                                            complexity, 164
                                             Nash equilibrium, 143–146
Game form
                                             subgame perfect equilibrium, 146–154
 extensive, 201
                                           Inflation–deflation principle, 205
 extensive, with perfect information, 90
                                           Information
Game theory and competitive
                                             more is better, ? 71.2
    equilibrium, 3
                                             more may hurt, ? 28.2, ? 48.1
Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem, 181.2
                                           Information function, y 68.1
Groves mechanism, 184
                                             partitional, y 68.2
Guess the average, ? 35.1
                                           Information partition
 rationalizability, ? 56.5
                                             correlated equilibrium, y 45.1
Guessing right, ? 36.1
                                             extensive game with imperfect
                                                information, y 200.1
H
                                           Information set, y 200.1
Hats, puzzle of, 71                          interpretation, 205
346                                                                           Index



Information set (continued)                 Knowledge function, 69, 70
  nonordered,  223.1, ? 229.1              Kuhn’s theorem, 99.2
Initial history, 90                          in game with chance moves, ? 102.1
Interchange of moves                         in game with simultaneous moves,
  equivalence of extensive games, 208           ? 103.3
Interchangeable equilibria
  extensive game with perfect
                                            L
     information, ? 100.2
  strictly competitive game, 23             Leader–follower game,  97.3
Interchangeable players in coalitional      Learning, 52
     game, 292                              Lexicographic minimality in nucleolus of
Internal stability in coalitional game,         coalitional game, 286.2
     y 279.1                                Lexicographic preferences in machine
Interpretation                                  game, 165, 172–174
  forward induction, 112                    Limit of means
  information set, 205
                                             Nash folk theorem, 144.3
  mixed strategy Nash equilibrium,
                                             perfect folk theorem, 146.2
     37–44
                                             preferences, 138
  solutions, 5
                                             repeated game, 139
  state of the world, 67
                                            Location game,  18.6
  strategic game, 13
                                             iterated elimination of dominated
  strategy in extensive game, 103
                                                actions, ? 63.1
Introductory phase of machine game,
                                             rationalizable actions, ? 57.1
     171
                                            Long- and short-lived players in infinite
Investment race, ? 35.2
                                                game, ? 148.1
Irrational players, 239
Irrelevant alternatives, independence of,
     306                                    M
Iterated elimination
  forward induction, 110–114                Machine, 140, 164
  and rationalizable actions, 61.2           complexity, 165
  strictly dominated actions, y 60.2        Machine game, y 165.1
  subgame perfect equilibrium, 108           cycling/introductory phases, 171
  weakly dominated actions, 62               extensive game and complexity,
    and subgame perfect equilibrium, 108        ? 174.1

                                             lexicographic preferences, 165
J                                            structure of equilibria, 168–174
                                            Majority game,  295.3, ? 295.4
Judgment of Solomon, see Solomon’s           bargaining set,  282.2
   predicament                               core,  259.1,  260.3
                                             kernel,  285.2
K                                            stable set,  279.3
Kakutani’s fixed point theorem, 20.1         weighted, ? 289.2
Kalai–Smorodinsky solution, 310                nucleolus, ? 289.2
Kernel of coalitional game, y 284.1            Shapley value,  294.1
 and bargaining set, 285.1                  Marginal contribution of player in
 and nucleolus, 287.1                           coalitional game, 291
Knowledge                                   Market for indivisible good
 common, y 73.1, y 73.2                      core,  260.1
 mutual, 73                                  Shapley value,  294.4
Knowledge and solution concepts, 76–81       stable set, ? 280.2
Index                                                                          347



Market with transferable payoff, 263       Nash bargaining
 bargaining set, ? 283.1                    and bargaining game of alternating
 core, 264                                     offers, 310–311
   nonempty, 264.2                          comparative statics of risk aversion,
Markovian machine, 143                           304.1
Matching pennies,  17.1                    independence of irrelevant
Maxminimizer, y 21.2, 209                      alternatives, 306
Mechanism design, see implementation        Pareto efficiency, 305
    theory                                  problem, y 300.1
Memory, poor (extensive games that          symmetry, y 305.1
    model), 204                            Nash equilibrium
Message                                     Bayesian game, y 26.1
 in Beer or Quiche game,  244.2            behavioral strategies, 216
 in signaling game, 237                     and correlated equilibrium, 45.3
Minmax payoff, 143                          existence for strategic game, 20.3
Mistakes, 247                               extensive game with perfect
Mixed extension                                information, y 93.1
 strategic game, y 32.1                     finitely repeated game, 155–157
 strictly competitive, 36                   infinitely repeated game, 143–146
Mixed strategy                              interchangeability, 23
 as belief, 43                              knowledge requirements, 77.1
                                            mixed strategy of extensive game, 216
 extensive game
                                            mixed strategy of strategic game,
   imperfect information, y 212.1
                                               y 32.3, 43
   perfect information, 93
                                            strategic game, y 14.1
 naı̈ve interpretation, 37
                                              and maxminimizers, 22.2
 outcome equivalence with behavioral
                                            and trembling hand perfect
    strategy, 214
                                               equilibrium, 248
 as pure strategy in extended game, 39
                                           Nash folk theorem
 strategic game, 32
                                            discounting criterion, 145.2
Mixed strategy equilibrium
                                            finitely repeated game, 156.1
 approachable, 42
                                            limit of means criterion, 144.3
 and correlated equilibrium, 45.3
                                           Nash implementation, 185–191
 extensive game, 216
                                            revelation principle, 185.2
 Harsanyi’s model, 41–43                   Nash solution, y 301.2
 interpretation, 37–44                      axiomatic definition, 305–310
 knowledge requirements, 78.1               exact implementation, 311
 as steady state, 38                       Nature, moves of, see chance moves
 strategic game, y 32.3, y 44.1            Negotiation, see bargaining game of
Monotonic choice rule, y 186.1                 alternating offers, Nash bargaining
Mutation, 49                               Never-best response, y 59.1
Mutual knowledge, 73                       No indifference condition, ? 100.2
My aunt and I (coalitional game)           No veto power, y 187.1
 bargaining set,  282.3                   Non-redundancy in Nash bargaining
 generalization,  295.3                       problem, y 300.1
 kernel,  285.3                           Noncooperative vs. coalitional games, 2,
                                               255
N                                          Nondecreasing function, 7
                                           Nonempty core
Naı̈ve interpretation of mixed strategy,    coalitional game, 262.1
    37                                      market with transferable payoff, 264.2
348                                                                          Index



Nonordered information sets,  223.1,      Pareto efficiency, 7
    ? 229.1                                 axiom of Nash solution, 305
Nontransferable payoff coalitional game,   Pareto frontier of agreement set, 122
   y 268.2                                 Parliament, coalitional game model,
Normal form game, see strategic game             295.3, ? 295.4
Nucleolus of coalitional game, y 286.1     Partition of a set, 7
 and kernel, 287.1                         Partitional information function, y 68.2
                                           Payoff function, 13
O                                          Payoff profile
                                            repeated game
Objection in coalitional game                 discounting, 138
 bargaining set, 281                          limit of means, 138
 kernel, 284                                strategic game, 139
 Nash solution, 302                        Perfect Bayesian equilibrium, y 232.1
 nucleolus, 285                             and sequential equilibrium, 234.1
 Shapley value, 290
                                           Perfect folk theorem
 stable set, 278
                                            discounting criterion, 151.1
One deviation property
                                            finitely repeated game, 159.1
 sequential equilibrium, ? 227.1
                                            limit of means criterion, 146.2
 subgame perfect equilibrium, 98.2
                                            overtaking criterion, 149.1
   bargaining game, ? 123.1
                                           Perfect information extensive game,
   game with chance moves, ? 102.1
                                                y 89.1
   game with simultaneous moves,
                                            strategic form, y 94.1
     ? 103.3
                                           Perfect recall, y 203.3
   infinitely repeated game with
                                           Perturbed game
     discounting, 153.1
                                            chain-store,  239.1
Opting out (bargaining), 128
                                            mixed and pure strategies, 42
Outcome
 extensive game                             trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
                                                247
   imperfect information, 213, 223
                                           Phases of equilibrium of machine game,
   perfect information, 93
                                                171
 implementation theory, 178
                                           ϕ, see Shapley value
 strategic game, 11
Outcome-equivalence of mixed and           Plan of action vs. strategy, 103
     behavioral strategies, 214            Planner (implementation theory), 177
Outcome-equivalent strategies, 94          Player function in extensive game
Output function of machine, 140, 164        imperfect information, y 200.1
Outside option                              perfect information, y 89.1
 in bargaining, 128                        Pollute the lake, ? 261.3
 in BoS,  110.1                           Pooling equilibrium in Spence’s model,
Outside option principle, 129                    237.2
Overtaking                                  eliminated by refinement,  246.1
 perfect folk theorem, 149.1               Pre-trial negotiation, ? 246.2
 preferences, 139                          Preference relation, 7
 repeated game, 139                         repeated game, 137
                                           Prior belief
                                            in Bayesian game, y 25.1
P
                                            and posterior belief, 75
PAR (Nash solution axiom), 305             Prisoner’s dilemma,  16.2
Paradoxes in finite horizon games, 105      equilibria of machine game,  166.2,
Paratroopers, 170                               169, 172
Index                                                                            349



Prisoner’s dilemma (continued)              Repeated game
 grim strategy in repeated game,  141.1     constituent game, 136
   complexity,  166.1                       finite, 155
 infinitely vs. finitely repeated game,      finite vs. infinite, 134
    134                                      forms of preference relation, 137–139
 modified in finitely repeated game, 159     infinite, y 137.1
 rationalizability, 56                       seealso finitely repeated game,
Probability measure, 7                          infinitely repeated game
Production economy                          Reputation, 238–243
 core, ? 259.3                              Restrictions on beliefs, 243–246
 core convergence, ? 268.1                  Revelation principle
 nucleolus, ? 289.1                          DSE implementation, 181.4
 Shapley value, ? 295.2                      Nash implementation, 185.2
Production function, 264                    Reversal of beliefs,  236.1
Profile, 7                                  Risk of breakdown in bargaining, 129
Proper equilibrium, 254                      and Nash solution, 310.3
Punishment                                  Risk, comparative statics (Nash
 limited length of time, 146.2                  bargaining), 304.1
 punishing the punisher, 149.1
 rewarding players who punish, 150, 159     S
 trigger strategies, 143                    S, see coalition
Pure strategy                               S-feasible payoff vector, 258
 extensive game, y 203.1                    Second price auction, ? 18.3
 strategic game, 32                          imperfect information,  27.1
Purification of mixed strategy              Self-evident event, y 73.2
    equilibrium, 39                         Selten’s horse
Puzzle of the hats, 71                       sequential equilibria,  225.2
                                             trembling hand perfect equilibria,
Q                                                 252.1
                                            Separating equilibrium,  237.2,  246.1
Quasi-concave preference relation, 7, 20    Sequential equilibrium, y 225.1
                                             assessment, y 222.1
R                                            belief system, 223
                                             coalescing of moves,  226.2
Rational choice, 4                           existence, 253.2
Rational, individually, see enforceable,     and perfect Bayesian equilibrium,
    143                                           234.1
Rationalizability, 53                        refinements, 243–246
 independence vs. correlation in beliefs,    restrictions on beliefs, 243–246
    57                                       reversal of beliefs,  236.1
 and iterated elimination of strictly        and structural consistency, 228–231
    dominated actions, 61.2                  and trembling hand perfect
 knowledge requirements, 80.1                    equilibrium, 251.2
Rationalizable action, y 54.1, y 55.1       Sequential rationality, 221, 223, y 224.1
Recall, 203                                 Shapley value, y 291.2
Reduced strategic form, y 95.1               axiomatic characterization, 292
Reduced strategy, 94                         objections and counterobjections, 289
Refinements of sequential equilibrium,      Short-lived players in infinite game,
    243–246                                      ? 148.1

Relative probabilities, 254                 Shouting game in implementation, 188,
Renegotiation, 161                               189
350                                                                          Index



Signal function in Bayesian game, y 25.1    Stable set of coalitional game, y 279.1
Signaling game, 237                          and core, 279.2
 pooling equilibrium,  237.2                generalized, ? 280.5
   eliminated by refinement,  246.1        Stackelberg game,  97.3
 separating equilibrium,  237.2,  246.1   Standard of behavior in coalitional
Simple coalitional game, ? 261.1                 game, 279
 core, ? 261.1                              State of machine, 140, 164
 stable sets, ? 280.1                       State of the world, 67
Simultaneous moves in extensive game        Stationarity of strategies in bargaining
 imperfect information, 202                      game, 126
 perfect information, 102                   Steady state interpretation, 5, 14
Solomon’s predicament,  186.3,  190.1,    Strategic form
      191.2                                 agent strategic form, 250
Solution                                     extensive game with perfect
 for coalitional games                           information, y 94.1
   bargaining set, y 282.1                  Strategic game, y 11.1
   core (nontransferable payoff), y 268.3    Bayesian, y 25.1
   core (transferable payoff), y 258.2       dominant strategy equilibrium, y 181.1
   general idea, 255                         examples, 15–19
   kernel, y 284.1                           existence of Nash equilibrium, 20.3
   Nash solution, y 301.2                    vs. extensive game, 3
   nucleolus, y 286.1
                                             form of extensive game, y 94.1
   Shapley value, y 291.2
                                             imperfect information, 24
   stable sets, y 279.1
                                             interpretation, 13
 deductive interpretation, 5
                                             mixed extension, y 32.1
 for extensive games
                                             as reduced strategic form, y 95.1
   perfect Bayesian equilibrium, y 232.1
                                             solutions, see solution
   sequential equilibrium, y 225.1
                                             strictly competitive, y 21.1
   subgame perfect equilibrium, y 97.2
                                             symmetric, ? 20.4
   trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
     y 251.1                                 tabular representation, 13
 general idea, 2                             trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
 implementation theory, 179                      y 248.1
 steady state interpretation, 5             Strategic game form, 178
 for strategic games                        Strategy
   correlated equilibrium, y 45.1            equilibrium structure in repeated
   dominant strategy equilibrium,                game, 134, 163
     y 181.1                                 extensive game
   evolutionary equilibrium, y 49.1            imperfect information, y 203.1
   iterated elimination of strictly            interpretation, 103
     dominated actions, y 60.2                 perfect information, y 92.1
   mixed strategy equilibrium, y 32.3          perfect information and chance
   Nash equilibrium, y 14.1                      moves, 102
   rationalizability, y 54.1                   perfect information and simultaneous
   trembling hand perfect equilibrium,           moves, 102
     y 248.1                                   vs. plan of action, 103
SPE, see subgame perfect equilibrium         as machine in repeated game, 140
Spence’s model of education,  237.2         stationarity in bargaining game, 126
 refinement of equilibria,  246.1          Strict equilibrium, 50
Split-the-pie game,  120.1                 Strict individual rationality
 subgame perfect equilibrium,  125.1        Nash bargaining, ? 309.2
Index                                                                           351



Strict individual rationality (strict      Three-player bargaining, 130
     enforceability), 143                  Three-player majority game
Strictly competitive strategic game,        bargaining set,  282.2
      17.1, y 21.1                         core,  259.1
 value, 23                                  kernel,  285.2
Strictly dominated action, y 59.2           stable set,  279.3
Strictly enforceable payoff                Transferable payoff
     profile/outcome, 143                   coalitional game, y 257.1
Structural consistency, 222, y 228.1        coalitional game without, y 268.2
 and sequential equilibrium, 228–231        core, y 258.2
Structure of equilibria of repeated         market, 263
     game, 153–154                         Transition function of machine, 140,
 complexity, 163                               164
 cycling/introductory phases, 171          Treasure in the mountains,  259.2
Subgame of extensive game with perfect     Trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
     information, y 97.1                       246–253
Subgame perfect equilibrium                 extensive game, y 251.1
 extensive game with imperfect                existence, 253.2
     information, see sequential              and sequential equilibrium, 251.2
     equilibrium                              and weakly dominated strategy, 252
 extensive game with perfect                strategic game, y 248.1
     information, y 97.2                      existence, 249.1
 finitely repeated game, 157.2, 159.1         and Nash equilibrium, 248
 implementation, 191                          and weakly dominated strategy,
   Nash solution, 311                           248.2
 infinitely repeated game, 146–154         Trigger strategy in repeated game, 143
   discounting, 151.1, 154.1               Truthful implementation, y 179.2
   limit of means, 146.2                    and DSE-implementation, 181.4
   overtaking, 149.1                        and Nash implementation, 185.2
 interchangeability, ? 100.2                via Groves mechanism, 184.2
 iterated elimination of weakly            Type of agent in exchange economy, 272
     dominated actions, 108                Types of players, 24, y 231.1
 virtual SPE-implementation, 192
Superadditivity of coalitional game, 258   U
Superfluous moves
 equivalence of extensive games, 206       Uncertainty
Support of probability distribution, 32     in extensive game
SYM (Nash solution axiom), 305                imperfect information, 200
SYM (Shapley value axiom), 292                perfect information, 101
Symmetric bargaining problem, y 305.1       in model of rational choice, 4, ? 71.2
Symmetric game, ? 20.4                      about others’ characteristics, 24
 evolutionary equilibrium, ? 51.1           about others’ knowledge, 29
Symmetry axiom                             Unique best agreements in Nash
 Nash solution, 305                            bargaining problem, y 300.1
 Shapley value, 292                        Utility function, 4
Symmetry function, y 305.1                  see also payoff function, 13

T                                          V
Terminal history in extensive game         Value
 imperfect information, y 200.1             coalitional game, 290
 perfect information, y 89.1                strictly competitive game, 23
352                                                                     Index



Veto player in coalitional game,      Weakly dominated action, y 62.1
     ? 261.1                           and trembling hand perfect
Veto power, y 187.1                      equilibrium, 248.2
Virtual SPE-implementation, 192       Weighted majority game, ? 289.2
Von Neumann–Morgenstern utility        Shapley value,  294.1
    function, 5                       Winning coalition, ? 261.1
                                      Worth of a coalition, y 257.1
W
                                      Z
War of attrition,  18.4
Weak separability of preferences in   Zerosum coalitional game, ? 261.2
   repeated game, y 137.1              weighted majority game, ? 289.2
Weakly dominant action, ? 18.3        Zerosum strategic game, 21
