HAL R. VARIAN
                1 NORTON
                       To my parents




Copyright @ 1992, 1984, 1978 by W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.


All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America


THIRD EDITION


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data


Varian, Hal R.
     Mlcroeconon~lcanalysis / Hal R. Varian. -- 3rd ed.
        p. an
     Includes blbllographlcal references and index.
     1. Mlcroeconomlcs.      1. Title.
   HB172.V35 1992
   338.5--dc20


ISBN 0-393-95735-7


W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110
W. W. Norton & Company, Ltd., 10 Coptic Street, London WClA 1PU
                 CONTENTS


  PREFACE

1 Technology
  Measurement of inputs and outputs 1 Specification of technology 2
  Example: Input requzrement set Example: Isoquant Example: Short-
  run productzon posszbzlztzes set Example: Pt-oductzon functzon Exam-
  ple: Transformatzon functzon Example: Cobb-Douglas technology Ex-
  ample: Leontzef technology Activity analysis 5 Monotonic technologies
  6 Convex technologies 7 Regular technologies 9 Parametric rep-
  resentations of technology 10 The technical rate of substitution 11
  Example: T R S for a Cobb-Douglas technology The elasticity of substitu-
  tion 13      Example: The elastzczty of substztutzon for the Cobb-Douglas
  productzon functzon Returns to scale 14        Example: Returns to scale
  and the Cobb-Douglas technology Homogeneous and homothetic technolo-
  gies 17     Example: The CES productzon functzon Exercises 21


2 Profit Maximization .
  Profit maximization 25 Difficulties 28     Example: The profit functzon
  for Cobb-Douglas technology Properties of demand and supply functions
  31 Comparative statics using the first-order conditions 32 Compara-
  tive statics using algebra 35 Recoverability 36 Exercises 39
  VI CONTENTS

3 Profit Function
  Properties of the profit function 40      Example: The eflects of price
  stabilization Supply and demand functions from the profit function 43
  The envelope theorem 45 Comparative statics using the profit function
  46      Example: The LeChatelier principle Exercises 48


4 Cost Minimization

  Calculus analysis of cost minimization 49 More on second-order condi-
  tions 52 Difficulties 53      Example: Cost function for the Cobb-Douglas
  technology Example: The cost function for the CES technology Exam-
  ple: The cost function for the Leontief technology Example: The cost
  function for the linear technology Conditional factor demand functions
  58 Algebraic approach to cost minimization 6 1 Exercises 63


5 Cost Function                                            . . I




  Average and marginal costs 64     Example: The short-run Cobb-Douglas
  cost functions Example: Constant returns to scale and the cost function
  The geometry of costs 67       Example: The Cobb-Douglas cost curves
  Long-run and short-run cost curves 70 Factor prices and cost functions
  71 The envelope theorem for constrained optimization 75       Example:
  Marginal cost revisited Comparative statics using the cost function 76
  Exercises 77


6 Duality
  Duality 82 Sufficient conditions for cost functions 84 Demand func-
  tions 86      Example: Applying the duality mapping Example: Constant
  returns to scale and the cost function Example: Elasticity of scale and
  the cost function Geometry of duality 89        Example: Production func-
  tions, cost functions, and conditional factor demands The uses of duality
  91 Exercises 93
                                                                CONTENTS VII

 7 Utility Maximization
                    3 .:
   Consumer preferences n ,941 Example: The existence of a utility function
   Example: The marginal rate of substitution Consumer behavior 98 In-
   direct utility 102 Some important identities 105 The money met-
   ric utility functions 108   Example: The Cobb-Douglas utzlity function
                                                                                    L
   Example: The CES utility function Appendix 113 Exercises 114


 8 Choice
   Comparative statics 116     Example: Excise and income taxes The Slut-
   sky equation 119      Example: The Cobb-Douglas Slutsky equation P r o p
   erties of demand functions 122 Comparative statics using the first-order
   conditions 123 The integrability problem 125        Example: Integrabil-
   zty wzth two goods Example: Integrability with several goods Duality
   in consumption 129        Example: Solving for the direct utility function
   Revealed preference 131 Sufficient conditions for maximization 133
   Comparative statics using revealed preference 135 The discrete version
   of the Slutsky equation 137 Recoverability 138 Exercises 140


 9 Demand
   Endowments in the budget constraint 144     Labor supply    Homothetic
   utility functions 146 Aggregating across goods 147        Hicksian sepa-
   rability     The two-good model   Functional separability   Aggregating
   across consumers 152 Inverse demand functions 155 Continuity of
   demand functions 158 Exercises 157


10 Consumers' Surplus
   Compensating and equivalent variations 160 Consumer's surplus 163            ,
   Quasilinear utility 164 Quasilinear utility and money metric utility
   166 Consumer's surplus as an approximation 167 Aggregation 168
   Nonparametric bounds 170 Exercises 171
   Wf . CONTENTS


11 Uncertainty
   Lotteries 172 Expected utility 173 Uniqueness of the expected utility
   function 175 Other notations for expected utility 176 Risk aversion
   177      Example: The demand for insurance Global risk aversion 181
   Example: Comparative statics of a simple portfolio problem Example:
   Asset pricing Relative risk aversion 188        Example: Mean-variance
   utility State dependent utility 190 Subjective probability theory 190
   Example: The Allais paradox and the Ellsberg paradox The Allais paradox
       The Ellsberg paradox   Exercises 194                              I

                                                                   .r   t




12 Econometrics
   The optimization hypothesis 198 Nonparametric testing for maximizing
   behavior 199 Parametric tests of maximizing behavior 200 Impos-
   ing optimization restrictions 201 Goodness-of-fit for optimizing mod-
   els 201 Structural models and reduced form models 202 Estimating
   technological relationships 204 Estimating factor demands 207 More
   complex technologies 207 Choice of functional form 209        Example:
   The Diewert cost function Example: The translog cost function Esti-
   mating consumer demands 210          Demand functions for a single good
      Multiple equations      Example: Linear expenditure system Example:
   Almost Ideal Demand System Summary 213


13 Cornpetltive Markets

   The competitive firm 215 The profit maximization problem 216 The
   industry supply function 218    Example: Different cost functions Ex-
   ample: Identical cost functions Market equilibrium 219         Example:
   Identical firms Entry 220      Example: Entry and long-run equilibrium
   Welfare economics 221 Welfare analysis 222 Several consumers 224
   Pareto efficiency 225 Efficiency and welfare 226 The discrete good
   model 227 Taxes and subsidies 228 Exercises 230
                                                               CONTENTS IX


14 Monopoly                                                               -I    L




     Special cases 236 Comparative statics 236 Welfare and output 238
     Quality choice 239 Price discrimination 241 First-degree price dis-
     crimination 243 Second-degree price discrimination 244      Example:
     A graphical treatment Third-degree price discrimination 248  Welfare
     effects   Exercises 253


15 Came Theory
     Description of a game 260         Example: Matching pennies Example:
     The Pmsoner's Dzlemma Example: Cournot duopoly Example: Bertrand
     duopoly Economic modeling of strategic choices 263 Solution concepts
     264 Nash equilibrium 265          Example: Calculatzng a Nash equilibmum
     Interpretation of mixed strategies 268 Repeated games 269          Exam-
     ple: Maintaining a cartel Refinements of Nash equilibrium 271 Domi-
     nant strategies 272 Elimination of dominated strategies 272 Sequen-
     tial games 273      Example: A szmple bargaining model Repeated games
     and subgame perfection 278 Games with incomplete information 279
     Example: A sealed-bid auction Discussion of Bayes-Nash equilibrium 281
     Exercises 282


16 Oligopoly



_-
     Cournot equilibrium 285
     ics 288 Several firms 289                 .
                                 Stability of the system
                                      Welfare
                                                           Comparative stat-
                                                   Bertrand equilibrium 291
     Example: A model of sales Complements and substitutes 294 Quan-
     tity leadership 295 Price leadership 298 Classification and choice of
     models 301 Conjectural variations 302 Collusion 303 Repeated
     oligopoly games 305 Sequential games 307 Limit pricing 308 Ex-
     ercises 310
17 Exchange
   Agents and goods 314 Walrasian equilibrium 315 Graphical analysis
   316 Existence of Walrasian equilibria 317 Existence of an equilib-
   rium 319      Example: The Cobb-Douglas Economy The first theorem of
   welfare economics 323 The second welfare theorem 326       A revealed
   preference argument a Pareto efficiency and calculus 329 Welfare max-
   imization 333 Exercises 336


18 Production
   Firm behavior 338 Difficulties 340 Consumer behavior 341           Labor
   supply      Dzstnbutzon of profits Aggregate demand 342 Existence
   of an equilibrium 344 Welfare properties of equilibrium 345           A
   revealed preference argument a Welfare analysis in a productive economy
   348 Graphical treatment 349        Example: The Cobb-Douglas constant
   returns economy Example: A decreasing-returns-to-scale economy The
   Nonsubstitution Theorem 354 Industry structure in general equilibrium
   356 Exercises 357


19 Time
   Intertemporal preferences 358 Intertemporal optimization with two pe-
   riods 359 Intertemporal optimization with several periods 361     Ex-
   ample: Loganthrnic utzlity General equilibrium over time 363  Infinity
     General equilibrium over states of nature 365 Exercises 366


20 Asset Markets

   Equilibrium with certainty 368     Equilibrium with uncertainty 369
   Notation 370 The Capital Asset Pricing Model 371 The Arbitrage
   Pricing Theory 376      Two factors a Asset-speczfic n s k a Expected
   utility 379   Example: Expected utzlity and the A P T Complete markets
   382 Pure arbitrage 383 Appendix 385 Exercises 386
                                                               CONTENTS    XI


21 Equilibrium Analysis


                                                .                 .
   The core of an exchange economy 387 Convexity and size 393 Unique-
   ness of equilibrium 394     Gross substitutes Index analysis General
   equilibrium dynamics 398 Tatonnement processes 398 Nontaton-
   nement processes 401 Exercises 402


22 Welfare
   The compensation criterion 404     Welfare functions 409     Optimal tax-
   ation 410 Exercises 413


23 Public goods
   Efficient provision of a discrete public good 415 Private provision of a
   discrete public good 417 Voting for a discrete public good 417 Effi-
   cient provision of a continuous public good 418       Example: Solving for
   the efficient provision of a public good Private provision of a continuous
   public good 420       Example: Solving for Nash equilibrium provzsion Vot-
   ing 424       Example: Quasilinear utility and voting Lindahl allocations
   425     Demand revealing mechanisms 426 Demand revealing mecha-
   nisms with a continuous good 429 Exercises 430


24 Externalities


                                                                .
   An example of a production externality 433 Solutions to the external-
   ities problem 433
   rights
                            Pigovian taxes * Missing markets    Property
             The compensation mechanism 436 Efficiency conditions in the
   presence of externalities 438 Exercises 439
   XI1 CONTENTS


25 Information
   The principal-agent problem 441 Full information: monopoly solution
   442 Full information: competitive solution 444 Hidden action: mon-
   opoly solution 445     Agent's action can be observed o Analysis of the
   optimal incentive scheme      Example: Comparative statics Example:
   Principal-agent model with mean-variance utility Hidden actions: compet-
   itive market 455    Example: Moral hazard in insurance markets Hidden
   information: monopoly 457 Market equilibrium: hidden information
   464      Example: A n algebraic example Adverse selection 466 The
   lemons market and adverse selection 468 Signaling 469 Educational
   signaling 470 Exercises 471


26 Mathematics
   Linear algebra 473 Definite and semidefinite matrices 475  Tests for
   definite matrices   Cramer's rule 477 Analysis 477 Calculus 478
   Higher-order derivatives   Gradients and tangent planes 480 Limits
   481 Homogeneous functions 481 Affine functions 482 Convex sets
   482 Separating hyperplanes 483 Partial differential equations 483
   Dynamical systems 484 Random variables 485


27 Optimization
   Single variable optimization 487     First-order and second-order condi-
   tions       Example: First- and second-order conditions.   Concavity
   The envelope theorem       Example: The value function Example: The
   envelope theorem Comparative statics        Example: Comparative statics
   for a particular problem Multivariate maximization 493        First- and
   second-order conditions      Comparative statics     Example: Compara-
   tive statics Convexity and concavity       Quasiconcave and quasiconvex
   functions Constrained maximization 497 An alternative second-order
   condition 498       How to remember the second-order conditions      The
   envelope theorem Constrained maximization with inequality constraints
   503 Setting up Kuhn-Tucker problems 504 Existence and continuity
   of a maximum 506

   References l A1 Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises l A9 Index 1 A37
                      PREFACE


The first edition of Microeconomic Analysis was published in 1977. Af-
ter 15 years, I thought it was time for a major revision. There are two
types of changes I have made for this third edition, structural changes and
substantive changes.
   The structural changes involve a significant rearrangement of the mate-
rial into "modular" chapters. These chapters have, for the most part, the
same titles as the corresponding chapters in my undergraduate text, In-
termedzate Mzcroeconomzcs. This makes it easy for the student to go back
to the undergraduate book to review material when appropriate. It also
works the other way around: if an intermediate student wants to pursue
more advanced work on a topic, it is easy to turn to the appropriate chap-
ter in Mzcroeconomzc Analyszs. I have found that this modular structure
also has two further advantages: it is easy to traverse the book in various
orders, and it makes it more convenient to use the book for reference.
   In addition to this reorganization, there are several substantive changes.
First, I have rewritten substantial sections of the book. The material is now
less terse, and, I hope, more accessible. Second, I have brought a lot of
material up to date. In particular, the material on monopoly and oligopoly
has been completely updated, following the major advances in the theory
of industrial organization during the eighties.
   Third, I have added lots of new material. There are now chapters on
game theory, asset markets, and information. These chapters can serve
as an appropriate introduction to this material for first-year economics
students. I haven't tried to provide in-depth treatments of these topics since
I've found that is better pursued in the second or third year of graduate
XIV   PREFACE


studies, after facility with the standard tools of economic analysis have
been mastered.
   Fourth, I've added a number of new exercises, along with complete an-
swers to all odd-numbered problems. I must say that I am ambivalent
about putting the answers in the book-but I hope that most graduate
students will have sufficient willpower to avoid looking a t the answer until
they have put some effort into solving the problems for themselves.


Organization of the book

As I mentioned above, the book is organized into a number of short chap-
ters. I suspect that nearly everyone will want to study the material in the
first half of the book systematically since it describes the fundamental tools
of microeconomics that will be useful to all economists. The material in
the second half of the book consists of introductions to a number of t o p
ics in microeconomics. Most people will want to pick and choose among
these topics. Some professors will want to emphasize game theory; others
will want to emphasize general equilibrium. Some courses will devote a
lot of time t o dynamic models; others will spend several weeks on welfare
economics.
   It would be impossible to provide in-depth treatment of all of these top-
ics, so I have decided Lo provide introductions to the subjects. I've tried
t o use the notation and methods described in the first part of the book
so that these chapters can pave the way t o a more thorough treatment in
books or journal articles. Luckily, there are now several book-length treat-
ments of asset markets, game theory, information economics, and general
equilibrium theory. The serious student will have no shortage of materials
in which he or she can pursue the study of these topics.


Production of the book

In the process of rewriting the book, I have moved everything over t o
Donald Knuth's Tj$system. I think that the book now looks a lot better;
furthermore, cross-referencing, equation numbering, indexing, and so on
are now a lot easier for both the author and the readers. Since the cost
t o the author of revising the book is now much less, the reader can expect
t o see more frequent revisions. (Perhaps that last sentence can be turned
into an exercise for the next edition.. . )
   Part of the book was composed on MS-DOS equipment, but the majority
of it was composed and typeset on a NeXT computer. I used Emacs as
the primary editor, operating in Kresten Thorup's auc-tex mode. I use
ispell for spell-checking, and the standard makeindex and bibtex tools
for indexing and bibliographic management. Tom Rokicki's Tj$view was
                                                                PREFACE   XV


the tool of choice for previewing and printing. Preliminary versions of the
diagrams were produced using Designer and Top Draw. An artist rendered
final versions using FreeHand and sent me the Encapsulated Postscript files
which were then incorporated into the TJ$ code using Trevor Darrell's
p s f i g macros. I owe a special debt of gratitude to the authors of these
software tools, many of which have been provided to users free of charge.


Acknowledgments

Many people have written to me with typos, comments, and suggestions
over the years. Here is a partial list of names: Tevfik Aksoy, Jim Andreoni,
Gustavo Angeles, Ken Binmore, Soren Blomqvist, Kim Border, Gordon
Brown, Steven Buccola, Mark Burkey, Lea Verdin Carty, Zhiqi Chen, John
Chilton, Francisco Armando da Costa, Giacomo Costa, David W. Craw-
ford, Peter Diamond, Karen Eggleston, Maxim Engers, Sjur Flam, Mario
Forni, Marcos Gallacher, Jon Hamilton, Barbara Harrow, Kevin Jackson,
Yi Jiang, John Kennan, David Kiefer, Rachel Kranton, Bo Li, George
Mailath, David Malueg, Duhamel Marc, John Miller, V. A. Noronha, Mar-
tin Osborne, Marco Ottaviani, Attila Ratfai, Archie Rosen, Jan Rutkowski,
Michael Sandfort, Marco Sandri, Roy H. M. Sembel, Mariusz Shatba,
Bert Schoonbeek, Carl Simon, Bill Sjostrom, Gerhard Sorger, Jim Swan-
son, Knut Sydsater, A. J. Talman, Coenraad Vrolijk, Richard Woodward,
fiances Wooley, Ed Zajac, and Yong Zhu. If my filing system were better,
there would probably be several more names. I appreciate being notified
of errata and will usually be able to correct such bugs in the next printing.
You can send me e-mail about bugs at Hal.VarianQumich. edu.
   Several people have contributed suggestions on the new third edition,
including Eduardo Ley, Pat Reagan, John Weymark, and Jay Wilson. Ed-
uardo Ley also provided some of the exercises and several of the answers.
   Finally, I want to end with a comment to the student. As you read this
work, it is important to keep in mind the immortal words of Sir Richard
Steele (1672-1729): "It is to be noted that when any part of this paper
appears dull there is a design in it."

                              >
                                                               Ann Arbor
                                                            November 1991
Microeconomic Analysis
      Third ~dition
                         CHAPTER             1
         TECHNOLOGY


The simplest and most common way to describe the technology of a firm
is the production function, which is generally studied in intermediate
courses. However, there are other ways to describe firm technologies that
are both more general and more useful in certain settings. We will discuss
several of these ways t o represent firm production possibilities in this chap-
ter, along with ways to describe economically relevant aspects of a firm's
technology.
    --

1.1 Measurement of inputs and outputs

A firm produces outputs from various combinations of inputs. In order to
study firm choices we need a convenient way t o summarize the production
possibilities of the firm, i.e., which combinations of inputs and outputs are
technologically feasible.
  It is usually most satisfactory to think of the inputs and outputs as being
measured in terms of BOWS:a certain amount of inputs per time period are
used to produce a certain amount of outputs per unit time period. It is a
good idea to explicitly include a time dimension in a specification of inputs
2 TECHNOLOGY (Ch. 1)

and outputs. If you do this you will be less likely t o use incommensurate
units, confuse stocks and flows, or make other elementary errors. For ex-
ample, if we measure labor time in hours per week, we would want to be
sure to measure capital services in hours per week, and the production of
output in units per week. However, when discussing technological choices
in the abstract, as we do in this chapter, it is common t o omit the time
dimension.
  We may also want to distinguish inputs and outputs by the calendar time
in which they are available, the location in which they are available, and
even the circumstances under which they become available. By defining the
inputs and outputs with regard to when and where they are available, we
can capture some aspects of the temporal or spatial nature of production.
For example, concrete available in a given year can be used t o construct
a building that will be completed the following year. Similarly, concrete
purchased in one location can be used in production in some other location.
  An input of "concrete" should be thought of as a concrete of a particular
grade, available in a particular place a t a particular time. In some cases we
might even add to this list qualifications such as "if the weather is dry";
that is, we might consider the circumstances, or state of nature, in which
the concrete is available. The level of detail that we will use in specifying
inputs and outputs will depend on the problem at hand, but we should
remain aware of the fact that a particular input or output good can be
specified in arbitrarily fine detail.


1.2 Specification of technology

Suppose the firm has n possible goods to serve as inputs and/or outputs.
If a firm uses y$ units of a good j as an input and produces y; of the good
as an output, then the net output of good j is given by yj = y; -       -;. If
the net output of a good j is positive, then the firm is producing more of
good j than it uses as an input; if the net output is negative, then the firm
is using more of good j than it produces.
   A production plan is simply a list of net outputs of various goods. We
can represent a production plan by a vector y in Rn where yj is negative
if the j th good serves as a net input and positive if the j th good serves
as a net output. The set of all technologically feasible production plans is
called the firm's production possibilities set and will be denoted by Y,
a subset of R n. The set Y is supposed to describe all patterns of inputs and
outputs that are technologically feasible. It gives us a complete description
of the technological possibilities facing the firm.
   When we study the behavior of a firm in certain economic environments,
we may want to distinguish between production plans that are "immedi-
ately feasible" and those that are "eventually" feasible. For example, in
the short run, some inputs of the firm are fixed so that only production
                                            SPECIFICATION OF TECHNOLOGY     3

plans compatible with these fixed factors are possible. In the long run,
such factors may be variable, so that the firm's technological possibilities
may well change.
   We will generally assume that such restrictions can be described by some
vector z in R n . For example, z could be a list of the maximum amount
of the various inputs and outputs that can be produced in the time period
under consideration. The restricted or short- run production possi-
bilities set will be denoted by Y(z); this consists of all feasible net output
bundles consistent with the constraint level z. Suppose, for example, that
factor n is fixed at yn in the short run. Then Y(yn) = {y in Y : yn = y,).
Note that Y(z) is a subset of Y, since it consists of all production plans
that are feasiblewhich means that they are in Y-and that also satisfy
some additional conditions.
  I


EXAMPLE: Input requirement set
Suppose we are considering a firm that produces only one output. In this
case we write the net output bundle as (y, -x) where x is a vector of inputs
that can produce y units of output. We can then define a special case of a
restricted production possibilities set, the input requirement set:
                     V(y) = {x in R; : (y, -x) is in Y)
The input requirement set is the set of all input bundles that produce at
least y units of output.
   Note that the input requirement set, as defined here, measures inputs as
positive numbers rather than negative numbers as used in the production
possibilities set.
      L



EXAMPLE: lsoquant
In the case above we can also define an isoquant:
      Q(y) = {x in R; : x is in V(y) and x is not in V(Y') for Y' > y).
The isoquant gives all input bundles that produce exactly y units of output.


EXAMPLE: Short-run production possibilities set
Suppose a firm produces some output from labor and some kind of ma-
chine which we will refer to as "capital." Production plans then look like
(y, -1, -k) where y is the level of output, 1 the amount of labor input,
and k the amount of capital input. We imagine that labor can be varied
immediately but that capital is fixed at the level k in the short run. Then      ,



                      Y(K)= {(y, -1, -k) in Y:k = k)
is an example of a short- run production possibilities set.
    4 TECHNOLOGY (Ch. 1)



    EXAMPLE: Production function
    If the firm has only one output, we can define the production function:
     f (x) = {y in R : y is the maximum output associated with - x in Y).


    EXAMPLE: Transformation function
    There is an n-dimensional analog of a production function that will be
    useful in our study of general equilibrium theory. A production plan y in
    Y is (technologically) efficient if there is no y' in Y such that y' y >
    and y' # y; that is, a production plan is efficient if there is no way to
    produce more output with the same inputs or to produce the same output
    with less inputs. (Note carefully how the sign convention on inputs works
    here.) We often assume that we can describe the set of technologically
    effieient production plans by a transformation function T : Rn -+ R
    where T(y) = 0 if and only if y is efficient. Just as a production function
    picks out the maximum scalar output as a function of the inputs, the
    transformation function picks out the maximal vectors of net outputs.


    EXAMPLE: Cobb-Douglas technology
    Let a be a parameter such that 0 < a < 1. Then the Cobb-Douglas
    technology is defined in the following manner. See Figure 1.1A.
                      Y = {(y, -21, -x2) in R3 : y 5 ~pixh-~)
                   V(y) = {(XI,$2) in R: : y 5 x;~x:-~)
C
                   Q(y) = {( XI, 22) in R: : y = x ~ x i - ~ )
                   Y(z) = {(y, -XI, -22) in R~: 9   < x?x:-~,x~= Z)
            T(y, X I , x2) = y - x;lxiPa
               f (xl, x2) = x;x:-~.


    EXAMPLE: Leontief technology
    Let a > 0 and b > 0 be parameters. Then the Leontief technology is
    defined in the following manner. See Figure 1.1B.
                       Y = {(y, -21, -x2) in R3 : y 5 min(ax1, bx2))
                    V(y) = {( XI , 22) in R: : y 5 min(axl, bx2))
                    Q(y) = {( XI , 22) in R: : y = min(axl, bx2))
             T(Y,x1,x2) = Y - min(ax1, bx2)
               f (xl, 22) = min(ax1, bx2).
                           FACTOR 1                               FACTOR 1
                  A                                    B

     Cobb-Douglas and Leontief technologies. Panel A depicts                   Figure
     the general shape of a Cobb-Douglas technology, and panel B               1.1
     depicts the general shape of a Leontief technology.
             I
  In this chapter we will deal primarily with firms that produce only one
output; therefore, we will generally describe their technology by input re-
quirement sets or production functions. Later on we will use the production
set and the transformation function.

                                                                   i
1.3 Activity analysis

The most straightforward way of describing production sets or input re-
quirement sets is simply to list the feasible production plans. For example,
suppose that we can produce an output good using factor inputs 1 and 2.
There are two different activities or techniques by which this production
can take place:

Technique A: one unit of factor 1 and two units of factor 2 produces one
unit of output.

Technique B: two units of factor 1 and one unit of factor 2 produces one
unit of output.

  Let the output be good 1, and the factors be goods 2 and 3. Then we
can represent the production possibilities implied by these two activities
by the production set



or the input requirement set



This input requirement set is depicted in Figure 1.2A.
         6 TECHNOLOGY (Ch. 1)

           It may be the case that to produce y units of output we could just use y
         times as much of each input for y = 1 , 2 , .. . . In this case you might think
         that the set of feasible ways to produce y units of output would be given
         by
                                   V(Y)= {(Y,2~)1(2Y,   Y)}.
         However, this set does not include all the relevant possibilities. It is true
         that (y, 2y) will produce y units of output if we use technique A and that
         (2y, y) will produce ylunits of output if we use technique B-but what if
         we use a mixture of techniques A and B?




                  1   2   3   4 FACTOR 1          1   2   3   4 FACTOR 1    1    2   3   4 FACTOR 1
                          A                               B                          C

Figure        Input requirement sets. Panel A depicts V(1), panel B
1.2           depicts V(2), and panel C depicts V(y) for a larger value of y.


           In this case we have to let y~ be the amount of output produced using
         technique A and y~ the amount of output produced using technique B.
    -    Then V(y) will be given by the set
                          V(Y)= {(YA       + ~ Y B , Y+B ~ Y A: Y) = YA + YB).
                                                                                                      ~

         So, for example, V(2) = {(2,4), (4,2),(3,3)), as depicted in Figure 1.2B.
         Note that the input combination (3,3) can produce two units of output by
         producing one unit using technique A and one unit using technique B.


         1.4 Monotonic technologies
         Let us continue to examine the two-activity example introduced in the last
         section. Suppose that we had an input vector (3,2). Is this sufficient t o
         produce one unit of output? We may argue that since we could dispose of
         2 units of factor 1 and be left with (1,2), it would indeed be possible t o
         produce 1 unit of output from the inputs (3,2). Thus, if such free disposal
         is allowed, it is reasonable to argue that if x is a feasible way to produce
         y units of output and x' is an input vector with at least as much of each
         input, then x' should be a feasible way to produce y. Thus, the input
         requirement sets should be monotonic in the following sense:
                                                          CONVEX TECHNOLOGIES    7


MONOTONICITY. If x is in V(y) and x' 2 x , then x' i s in V(y).

  If we assume monotonicity, then the input requirement sets depicted in
Figure 1.2 become the sets depicted in Figure 1.3.



           Im
FACTOR 2                            F




           1   2   3   4 FACTOR 1       1   2 3   4 FACTOR 1
                                                                u
                                                                1 2 3 4     FACTOR 1

                   A                              B                     C

       Monotonicity. Here are the same three input requirement                         Figure
       sets if we also assume monotonicity.                                            1.3


   Monotonicity is often an appropriate assumption for production sets as
well. In this context, we generally want t o assume that if y is in Y and
   <
y' y , then y' must also be in Y. Note carefully how the sign convention
works here. If y'      <
                      y , it means that every component of vector y' is less
than or equal t o the corresponding component of y. This means that the
production plan represented by y' produces an equal or smaller amount
of all outputs by using at least as much of all inputs, as compared to y.
Hence, it is natural t o suppose that if y is feasible, y' is also feasible.


1.5 Convex technologies
Let us now consider what the input requirement set looks like if we want
to produce 100 units of output. As a first step, we might argue that if
we multiply the vectors (1,2) and (2,l) by 100, we should be able just
to replicate what we were doing before and thereby produce 100 times as
much. It is clear that not all production processes will necessarily allow for
this kind of replication, but it seems to be plausible in many circumstances.
   If such replication is possible, then we can conclude that (100,200) and
(200,100) are in V(100). Are there any other possible ways t o produce 100
units of output? Well, we could operate 50 processes of activity A and 50
processes of activity B. This would use 150 units of good 1 and 150 units
of good 2 to produce 100 units of output; hence, (150,150) should be in the
input requirement set. Similarly, we could operate 25 processes of activity
A and 75 processes of type B. This implies that
         8 TECHNOLOGY (Ch. 1)


         should be in V(100).More generally,



         should be in V(100)for t = 0,.01, .02,.. . , l .
            We might as well make the obvious approximation here and let t take
         on any fractional value between 0 and 1. This leads to a production set of
         the form depicted in Figure 1.4A. The precise statement of this property
         is given in the next definition.

         CONVEXITY. If x and x' are in V(y),then tx                        + (1 - t)x' is in V(y)
         for all 0 5 t 5 1. That is, V(y)is a convex set.




            FACTOR 2                              FACTOR 2




                250 -                                 250
                200 -                                 200
                150 -                                 150 -                              9
                100 -                                 100 -


                       I    I C I I I                        I    ,   I     I I   ,
                           50  150 250   FACTOR                  50       150   250   FACTOR 1

                                  A                                             B
Figure        Convex input requirement sets. If x and x' can produce
1.4           y units of output, then any weighted average tx (1 - t)x' can +
              also produce y units of output. Panel A depicts a convex input
              requirement set with two underlying activities; panel B depicts
              a convex input requirement set with many activities.



            We have motivated the convexity assumption by a replication argument.
         If we want to produce a "large" amount of output and we can replicate
         "small" production processes, then it appears that the technology should be
         modeled as being convex. However, if the scale of the underlying activities
         is large relative to the desired amount of output, convexity may not be a
         reasonable hypothesis.
            However, there are also other arguments about why convexity is a rea-
         sonable assumption in some circumstances. For example, suppose that we
         are considering output per month. If one vector of inputs x produces y
                                                         REGULAR TECHNOLOGIES         9


units of output per month, and another vector x' also produces y units of
output per month, then we might use x for half a month and x' for half a
month. If there are no problems introduced by switching production plans
in the middle of the month, we might reasonably expect to get y units of
output.
   We applied the arguments given above to the input requirement sets, but
similar arguments apply to the production set. It is common to assume
                                             +
that if y and y' are both in Y, then t y ( 1 - t ) y r is also in Y for 0 t 1;< <
in other words, Y is a convex set. However, it should be noted that the
convexity of the production set is a much more problematic hypothesis than
the convexity of the input requirement set. For example, convexity of the
production set rules out %tart up costs" and other sorts of returns t o scale.
This will be discussed in greater detail shortly. For now we will describe
a few of the relationships between the convexity of V ( y ) ,the curvature of
the production function, and the convexity of Y.

C o n v e x production set implies convex i n p u t requirement set. If
the production set Y is a convex set, then the associated input requirement
set, V ( y ) ,is a conva set.

Proof. If Y is a convex set then it follows that for any x and x' such that
                                                        +
( y , -x) and ( y , -x') are in Y , we must have ( t y ( 1 - t ) y ,-tx - ( 1 - t ) x f )
in Y . This is simply requiring that ( y , -(tx+ ( 1 - t ) x 1 )is) in Y . It follows
                                       +
that if x and x' are in V ( y ) ,t x ( 1 - t)x' is in V ( y ) which shows that
V ( y )is convex. 1

C o n v e x i n p u t requirement set is equivalent t o quasiconcave pro-
d u c t i o n function. V ( y ) is a convex set if and only if the production
function f ( x ) is a quasiconcave function.

                             >
Proof. V ( y )= { x : f ( x ) y), which is just the upper contour set of f ( x ) .
But a function is quasiconcave if and only if it has a convex upper contour
set; see Chapter 27, page 496. 1




1.6 Regular technologies

Finally, we consider a weak regularity condition concerning V ( y ) .

REGULAR. V ( y ) is a closed, nonempty set for all y 2 0.

  The assumption that V ( y )is nonempty requires that there is some con-
ceivable way to produce any given level of output. This is simply to avoid
qualifying statements by phrases like "assuming that y can be produced."
         10 TECHNOLOGY (Ch. 1)


            The assumption that V(y) is closed is made for technical reasons and is
         innocuous in most contexts. One implication of the assumption that V(y)
         is a closed set is as follows: suppose that we have a sequence (xZ)of input
         bundles that can each produce y and this sequence converges to an input
         bundle x O. That is to say, the input bundles in the sequence get arbitrarily
         close to x O. If V(y) is a closed set then this limit bundle x O must be capable
         of producing y. Roughly speaking, the input requirement set must "include
         its own boundary."


         1.7 Parametric representations of technology
         Suppose that we have many possible ways to produce some given level of
         output. Then it might be reasonable to summarize this input set by a
         "smoothed" input set as in Figure 1.5. That is, we may want to fit a nice
         curve through the possible production points. Such a smoothing process
         should not involve any great problems, if there are indeed many slightly
         different ways to produce a given level of output.


         FACTOR 2 1




                 I
                                            FACTOR 1


Figure          Smoothing an isoquant. An input requirement set and a
1.5             "smooth" approximation to it.


            If we do make such an approximation to 'Lsmooth"the input requirement
         set, it is natural to look further for a convenient way to represent the
         technology by a parametric function involving a few unknown parameters.
         For example, the Cobb-Douglas technology mentioned earlier implies that
         any input bundle (x1,z2)that satisfies xyx! 2 y can produce at least y
         units of output.
            These parametric technological representations should not necessarily be
         thought of as a literal depiction of production possibilities. The produc-
         tion possibilities are the engineering data describing the physically possi-
         ble production plans. It may well happen that this engineering data can
                                     THE TECHNICAL RATE OF SUBSTITUTION    11


be reasonably well described by a convenient functional form such as the
Cobb-Douglas function. If so, such a parametric description can be very
useful.
   In most applications we only care about having a parametric approxima-
tion to a technology over some particular range of input and output levels,
and it is common to use relatively simple functional forms to make such
a parametric approximation. These parametric representations are very
convenient as pedagogic tools, and we will often take our technologies to
have such a representation. We can then bring the tools of calculus and
algebra to investigate the production choices of the firm.


1.8 The technical rate of substitution

Assume that we have some technology summarized by a smooth production
function and that we are producing at a particular point y* = f (x;, xz).
Suppose that we want to increase the amount of input 1 and decrease the
amount of input 2 so as to maintain a constant level of output. How can we
determine this technical rate of substitution between these two factors?
   In the two-dimensional case, the technical rate of substitution is just the
slope of the isoquant: how one has to adjust x2 to keep output constant
when xl changes by a small amount, as depicted in Figure 1.6. In the
n-dimensional case, the technical rate of substitution is the slope of an
isoquant surface, measured in a particular direction.
   Let x2(x1) be the (implicit) function that tells us how much of x2 it takes
to produce y if we are using xl units of the other input. Then by definition,
the function x2(xl) has to satisfy the identity



  We are after an expression for ax2(x;)/ax1. Differentiating the above
identity, we find:
                     af(x*)+ - af(x*)-----
                                      ax2(x;> = 0
                      8x1        ax2    ax1




This gives us an explicit expression for the technical rate of substitution.
   Here is another way to derive the technical rate of substitution. Think
of a vector of (small) changes in the input levels which we write as d x =
(dxl, dx2). The associated change in the output is approximated by
         12 TECHNOLOGY (Ch. 1)

         FACTOR 2   1




                                 \

                                                 FACTOR 1


Figure         T h e technical rate of substitution. The technical rate of
1.6            substitution measures how one of the inputs must adjust in order
               to keep output constant when another input changes.

         This expression is known as the total differential of the function f(x).
         Consider a particular change in which only factor 1 and factor 2 change,
         and the change is such that output remains constant. That is, dxl and dxz
         adjust "along an isoquant."
           Since output remains constant, we have




         which can be solved for
                                      dx2
                                      --     8fl8x1
                                          - --
                                      ~ X I  8fl8xz'
         Either the implicit function method or the total differential method may be
         used to calculate the technical rate of substitution. The implicit function
         method is a bit more rigorous, but the total differential method is perhaps
         more intuitive.


         EXAMPLE: TRS for a Cobb-Douglas technology
                                 a 1-a
         Given that f (xl,52) = x1x2   , we can take the derivatives to find




         It follows that
                             axz(x1) -   aflaxl -
                                     - - - - --
                                                    a 22
                               ax1       af/8x2   1 -axl'
            1
                                              THE ELASTICITY O F SUBSTITUTION   13



1.9 The elasticity of substitution
The technical rate of substitution measures the slope of an isoquant. The
elasticity of substitution measures the curvature of an isoquant. More
specifically, the elasticity of substitution measures the percentage change in
the factor ratio divided by the percentage change in the TRS, with output
being held fixed. If we let A(x2/x1) be the change in the factor ratio and
ATRS be the change in the technical rate of substitution, we can express
this as
                                     A(zz/z1)
                               a=-       ~21x1

                                         TRS
This is a relatively natural measure of curvature: it asks how the ratio of
factor inputs changes as the slope of the isoquant changes. If a small change
in slope gives us a large change in the factor input ratio, the isoquant is
relatively flat which means that the elasticity of substitution is large.
  In practice we think of the percent change as being very small and take
the limit of this expression as A goes to zero. Hence, the expression for a
becomes


    It is often convenient to calculate a using the logarithmic derivative.
In general, if y = g(x), the elasticity of y with respect to x refers to the
percentage change in y induced by a (small) percentage change in x. That
is,




Provided that x and y are positive, this derivative can be written as
                       '.
                                         dln y
                                 E = -
                                         dlnx'
To prove this, note that by the chain rule

                            d l n y d l n x - dlny
                            dlnx dx            dx '
Carrying out the calculation on the left-hand and the right-hand side of
the equals sign, we have
                            dlny 1 - --
                            --
                                       1dy
                            dlnxx      ydx'

                               -
                               d h y - --
                                       X ~ Y
                                         -
                               dlnx          ydx'
14 TECHNOLOGY (Ch. 1)


  Alternatively, we can use total differentials to write

                                        1
                                 dlny = -dy
                                          Y


so that
                                  dlny - d y x
                            e=----
                                  dlnx   dx
Again, the calculation given first is more rigorous, but the second calcula-
tion is more intuitive.
   Applying this to the elasticity of substitution, we can write

                                   d ln(x2lx1)
                             a = dln (TRS('

(The absolute value sign in the denominator is to convert the TRS to a
positive number so that the logarithm makes sense.)


EXAMPLE: The elasticity of substitution for the Cobb-Douglas pro-
          duction function

We have seen above that




                            x2 - --
                            -     1- a
                                      T RS.
                            21        a
It follows that
                           52     1- a
                                          +
                        In - = In - In ITRSI.
                           x1      a
This in turn im~lies




1 .I 0 Returns to scale

Suppose that we are using some vector of inputs x to produce some output
y and we decide to scale all inputs up or down by some amount t 2 0.
What will happen to the level of output?
                                                               RETURNS TO SCALE      15


   In the cases we described earlier, where we wanted only to scale output
up by some amount, we typically assumed that we could simply replicate
what we were doing before and thereby produce t times as much output
as before. If this sort of scaling is always possible, we will say that the
technology exhibits constant returns to scale. More formally,

CONSTANT RETURNS TO SCALE. A technology exhibits con-
stant returns to scale if any of the following are satisfied:

(1) y in Y implies t y is in Y , for all t 2 0;

(2) x in V ( y ) implies t x is in V ( t y ) for all t 2 0;
(3) f ( t x ) = t f ( x ) for dl t 2 0; i.e., the prodvction function f ( x ) is homo-
geneous of degree 1 .

   The replication argument given above indicates that constant returns to
scale is often a reasonable assumption to make about technologies. How-
ever, there are situations where it is not a plausible assumption.
   One circumstance where constant returns to scale may be violated is
when we try to "subdivide" a production process. Even if it is always pos-
sible to scale operations up by integer amounts, it may not be possible to
scale operations down in the same way. For example, there may be some
minimal scale of operation so that producing output below this scale in-
volves different techniques. Once the minimal scale of operation is reached,
larger levels of output can be produced by replication.
   Another circumstance where constant returns to scale may be violated
is when we want to scale operations up by noninteger amounts. Certainly,
replicating what we did before is simple enough, but how do we do one and
one half times what we were doing before?
   These two situations in which constant returns to scale is not satisfied
are only important when the scale of production is small relative to the
minimum scale of output.
   A third circumstance where constant returns to scale is inappropriate is
when doubling all inputs allows for a more efficient means of production to
be used. Replication says that doubling our output by doubling our inputs
is feasible, but there may be a better way to produce output. Consider,
for example, a firm that builds an oil pipeline between two points and
uses as inputs labor, machines, and steel to construct the pipeline. We
may take the relevant measure of output for this firm to be the capacity
of the resulting line. Then it is clear that if we double all inputs to the
production process, the output may more than double since increasing the
surface area of a pipe by 2 will increase the volume by a factor of 4.' In

  Of course, a larger pipe may be more diflicult to build, so we may not think of output
16 TECHNOLOGY (Ch. 1)


this case, when output increases by more than the scale of the inputs, we
say the technology exhibits increasing returns to scale.

INCREASING RETURNS TO SCALE. A technology exhzbits in-
creasing returns to scale zf f (tx) > t f (x) for all t > 1.

   A fourth way that constant returns to scale may be violated is by being
unable to replicate some input. Consider, for example, a 100-acre farm. If
we wanted to produce twice as much output, we could use twice as much
of each input. But this would imply using twice as much land as well. It
may be that this is impossible to do since more land may not be available.
Even though the technology exhibits constant returns to scale if we increase
all inputs, it may be convenient to think of it as exhibiting decreasing
returns to scale with respect to the inputs under our control. More
precisely, we have:

DECREASING RETURNS TO SCALE. A technology exhzbzts de-
creasing returns to scale zf f (tx) < t f (x) for all t > 1.

  The most natural case of decreasing returns to scale is the case where we
are unable to replicate some inputs. Thus, we should expect that restricted
production possibility sets would typically exhibit decreasing returns to
scale. It turns out that it can always be assumed that decreasing returns
to scale is due to the presence of some fixed input.
  To show this, suppose that f (x) is a production function for some k
inputs that exhibits decreasing returns to scale. Then we can introduce a
new "mythical" input and measure its level by z. Define a new production
function F(z, x) by
                             F(z, x) = z f (xlz).
Note that F exhibits constant returns to scale. If we multiply all inputs-
the x inputs and the z input-by some t 2 0, we have output going up
by t. And if z is fixed at 1, we have exactly the same technology that we
had before. Hence, the original decreasing returns technology f (x) can be
thought of as a restriction of the constant returns technology F ( z , x) that
results from setting z = 1.
  Finally, let us note that the various kinds of returns to scale defined
above are global in nature. It may well happen that a technology exhibits
increasing returns to scale for some values of x and decreasing returns to
scale for other values. Thus in many circumstances a local measure of
returns to scale is useful. The elasticity of scale measures the percent
increase in output due to a one percent increase in all inputs-that is, due
to an increase in the scale of operations.

  necessarily increasing exactly by a factor of 4. But it may very well increase by more
  than a factor of 2.
                          HOMOGENEOUS AND HOMOTHETIC TECHNOLOGIES           17


  Let y = f (x) be the production function. Let t be a positive scalar, and
consider the function y(t) = f (tx). If t = 1, we have the current scale of
operation; if t > 1, we are scaling all inputs up by t; and if t < 1, we are
scaling all inputs down by t.
  The elasticity of scale is given by

                                        dyo
                                       Y (t)
                                e(x) = -
                                          dt   l
                                          77
evaluated at t = I. Rearranging this expression, we have




Note that we must evaluate the expression at t = 1 to calculate the elas-
ticity of scale at the point x. We say that the technology exhibits locally
increasing, constant, or decreasing returns to scale as e(x) is greater, equal,
or less than 1.


EXAMPLE: Returns to scale and the Cobb-Douglas technology

Suppose that y = xyx!$ Then f(txl,tx2) = ( t ~ i ) ~ ( t=x ~ ) ~  ta+bxyx8 =
                                                                     +
ta+bf (xi, 22). Hence, f (txl, tx2) = t f (xi, x2) if and only if a b = 1.
             +
Similarly, a b > 1 implies increasing returns to scale, and a b < 1  +
implies decreasing returns to scale.
  In fact, the elasticity of scale for the Cobb-Douglas technology turns out
                  +
to be precisely a b. To see this, we apply the definition:




Evaluating this derivative at t = 1 and dividing by f (xi, x2) = xyx! gives
us the result.


1.1 1 Homogeneous and homothetic technologies

A function f (x) is homogeneous of degree k if f (tx) = tkf (x) for all
t > 0. The two most important "degrees" in economics are the zeroth
and first degree.2 A zero-degree homogeneous function is one for which


  However, it is sometimes thought that the
  important.
         f (tx) = f ( x ) , and a first-degree homogeneous function is one for which
         f (tx) = t f ( 4 .
           Comparing this definition to the definition of constant returns to scale,
         we see that a technology has constant returns to scale if and only if its
         production function is homogeneous of degree 1.
            A function g : R + R is said to be a positive monotonic transfor-
         mation if g is a strictly increasing function; that is, a function for which
         x > y implies that g(x) > g(y). (The "positive" is usually implied by
         the context.) A homothetic function is a monotonic transformation of
         a function that is homogeneous of degree 1. In other words, f (x) is ho-
         mothetic if and only if it can be written as f ( x ) = g(h(x)) where h(.) is
         homogeneous of degree 1 and g ( . ) is a monotonic function. See Figure 1.7
         for a geometric interpretation.


         FACTOR 2
                    I                                 FACTOR 2   I




                                                 FACTOR 1                      FACTOR I

                                        A                            B

Figure          Homogeneous and homot hetic functions. Panel A depicts
1.7             a function that is homogeneous of degree 1. If x and x' can both
                produce y units of output, then 2x and 2x' can both produce
                2y units of output. Panel B depicts a homothetic function. If
                x and x' produce the same level of output, y, then 2x and 2x'
                can produce the same level of output, but not necessarily 2y.


            Think of a monotonic transformation as a way t o measure output in
         different units. For example, we could measure the output of a chemical
         process in pints or quarts. Changing from one unit to another in this
         case is pretty s i m p l e w e just multiply or divide by two. A more exotic
         monotonic transformation would be one in which we measure the output in
         the square of the number of quarts. Given this interpretation, a homothetic
         technology is one for which there is some way to measure output so that
         the technology "looks like" constant returns t o scale.
            Homogeneous and homothetic functions are of interest due to the simple
         ways that their isoquants vary as the level of output varies. In the case of
         a homogeneous f u n e o n , the isoquants are all just "blown up" versions of
                        .,   :   4;jf       ;:
                                 W4""
                              HOMOGENEOUS AND HOMMiETIC TECHNOLOGIES                      19


a single isoquant. If f(x) is homogeneous of degree 1, then if x and x' can
produce y units of output it follows that tx and tx' can produce ty units
of output, as depicted in Figure 1.7~4.A homothetic function has almost
the same property: if x and x' produce the same level of output, then tx
and tx' can produce the same level of output-but it won't necessarily be
t times as much as the original output. The isoquants for a homothetic
technology look just like the isoquants for a homogeneous technology, only
the output levels associated with the isoquants are different.
   Homogeneous and homothetic technologies are of interest since they put
specific restrictions on how the technical rate of substitution changes as the
scale of production changes. In particular, for either of these functions the
technical rate of substitution is independent of the scale of production.
   This follows immediately from the remarks in Chapter 26, page 482,
where we show that if f (x) is homogeneous of degree 1, then df (x)/dx,is
homogeneous of degree 0. It follows that the ratio of any two derivatives
is homogeneous of degree zero, which is the result we seek.



EXAMPLE: The CES production function                      J




The c o n s t a n t elasticity of s u b s t i t u t i o n or CES p r o d u c t i o n function
has the form
                                  y = [alz;   + a2z!Ji.
It is easy to verify that the CES function exhibits constant returns to
scale. The CES function contains several other well-known production
functions as special cases, depending on the value of the parameter p. These
are described below and illustrated in Figure 1.8. In our discussion, it is
convenient to set the parameters a1 = a:! = 1.




      T h e CES production function. The CES production func-                                   Figure
      tion takes on a variety of shapes depending on the value of the                           1.8
      parameter p. Panel A depicts the case where p = 1, panel B
      the case where p = 0, and panel C the case where p = -oo.
20 TECHNOLOGY (Ch. T)

(1) The linear production function (p = 1). Simple substitution yields



(2) The Cobb-Douglas production function (p = 0). When p = 0 the CES
production function is not defined, due to division by zero. However, we
will show that as p approaches zero, the isoquants of the CES production
function look very much like the isoquants of the Cobb-Douglas production
function.
  This is easiest to see using the technical rate of substitution. By direct
calculation,


As p approaches zero, this tends to a limit of
                                      22
                               TRS = --,
                                          21
which is simply the TRS for the Cobb-Douglas production function.
(3) The Leontief production function (p = -m). We have just seen that
the TRS of the CES production function is given by equation (1.1). As p
approaches -m, this expression approaches



If x2 > x1 the TRS is (negative) infinity; if x2 < xl the TRS is zero. This
means that as p approaches -00, a CES isoquant looks like an isoquant
associated with the Leontief technology. I

  It will probably not surprise you to discover that the CES production
function has a constant elasticity of substitution. To verify this, note that
the technical rate of substitution is given by



so that


Taking logs, we see that



Applying the definition of a using the logarithmic derivative,
     ,
Notes

The elasticity d substitution is due t o Hicks (1932). For a discussion of
generalizations of the elasticity of substitution to the n-input case, see
Blackorby & Russell (1989) and the references cited therein. The elasticity
of scale is due to F'risch (1965).


Exercises

1.1. True or false? If V(y) is a convex set, then the associated production
set Y must be convex.

1.2. What is the elasticity of substitution for the general CES technology
           +
y = (alxy a2x!3'/p when a1 # an?
1.3. Define the o u t p u t elasticity of a factor i t o be



If f (x) = X?&, whsi %I the output elasticity of each factor?         ,


1.4. If c(x) is the elasticity of scale and ~ , ( x )is the output elasticity of
factor i, show that E(X) = Cr=lE,(x).

1.5. What is the elasticity of scale of the CES technology, f (xl, x2) =
(.'I + x;) f ?

1.6. True or false? A differentiable function g(x) is a strictly increasing
function if and only if g1(x) > 0.

1.7. In the text it was claimed that iff (x) is a homothetic technology and x
and x' produce the same level of output, then t x and tx' must also produce
the same level of output. Can you prove this rigorously?

1.8. Let f (xl, xz) be a homothetic function. Show that its technical rate of
substitution at (xl, x2) equals its technical rate of substitution a t (txl, tx2).

                                                          +
1.9. Consider the CES technology f (XI,x2) = [alxf azxglf. Show that
                                                                +
                                          x2) = A(p)[bxy (1- b)x$]f .
we can always write this in the form f (zl,

1.10. Let Y be a production set. We say that the technology is additive if
                                     +
y in Y and y' in Y implies that y y' is in Y.We say that the technology
                                <
is divisible if y in Y and 0 t 5 1 implies that t y is in Y. Show that
if a technology is both additive and divisible, then Y must be convex and
exhibit constant returns to scale.
22 TECHNOLOGY (Ch. 1)


1.11. For each input requirement set determine if it is regular, monotonic,
and/or convex. Assume that the parameters a and b and the output levels
are strictly positive.

  (a) V(Y)= {XI, x2: ax1   > logy, bx2 2 logy)
                         CHAPTER              2
         PROFIT
      MAXIMIZATION

Economic profit is defined to be the difference between the revenue a firm
receives and the costs that it incurs. It is important t o understand that all
costs must be included in the calculation of profit. If a small businessman
owns a grocery store and he also works in the grocery, his salary as an
employee should be counted as a cost. If a group of individuals loans a
firm money in return for a monthly payment, these interest payments must
be counted as a cost of production.
   Both revenues and costs of a firm depend on the actions taken by the
firm. These actions may take many forms: actual production activities,
purchases of factors, and purchases of advertising are all examples of actions
undertaken by a firm. At a rather abstract level, we can imagine that a firm
can engage in a large variety of actions such as these. We can write revenue
as a function of the level of operations of some n actions, R(a1,. . . ,a,),
and costs as a function of these same n activity levels, C(a1,.. . , a,).
   A basic assumption of most economic analysis of firm behavior is that
a firm acts so as to maximize its profits; that is, a firm chooses actions
( a l , . .. ,a,) so as to maximize R(a1, ... ,a,) - C(al ,..., a,). This is the
behavioral assumption that will be used throughout this book.
    24 PROFIT MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 2)


      Even at this broad level of generality, two basic principles of profit max-
    imization emerge. The first follows from a simple application of calculus. '
    The profit maximization problem facing the firm can be written as

                        max R(al, . . . , a n ) - C(a1,.. . ,an).
                       al,...,an


    A simple application of calculus shows that an optimal set of actions, a*=
F
    ( a ; ,. . . , a:), is characterized by the conditions




       The intuition behind these conditions should be clear: if marginal rev-
    enue were greater than marginal cost, it would pay to increase the level of
    the activity; if marginal revenue were less than marginal cost, it would pay
    to decrease the level of the activity.
       This fundamental condition characterizing profit maximization has sev-
    eral concrete interpretations. For example, one decision the firm makes is
    to choose its level of output. The fundamental condition for profit max-
    imization tells us that the level of output should be chosen so that the
    production of one more unit of output should produce a marginal revenue
    equal to its marginal cost of production. Another decision of the firm is
    to determine how much of a specific factor-say labor-to hire. The fun-
    damental condition for profit maximization tells us that the firm should
    hire an amount of labor such that the marginal revenue from employing
    one more unit of labor should be equal to the marginal cost of hiring that
    additional unit of labor.
       The second fundamental condition of profit maximization is the condition
    of equal long-run profits. Suppose that two firms have identical revenue
    functions and cost functions. Then it is clear that in the long run the
    two firms cannot have unequal profits-since each firm could imitate the
    actions of the other. This condition is very simple, but its implications are
    often surprisingly powerful.
       In order to apply these conditions in a more concrete way, we need to
    break up the revenue and cost functions into more basic parts. Revenue is
    composed of two parts: how much a firm sells of various outputs times the
    price of each output. Costs are also composed of two parts: how much a
    firm uses of each input times the price of each input.
       The firm's profit maximization problem therefore reduces to the problem
    of determining what prices it wishes to charge for its outputs or pay for its
    inputs, and what levels of outputs and inputs it wishes to use. Of course, it
    cannot set prices and activity levels unilaterally. In determining its optimal
    policy, the firm faces two kinds of constraints: technological constraints and
    market constraints.
                                                          PROFIT MAXIMIZATION       25


  Technological constraints are simply those constraints that concern
  the feasibility of the production plan. We have examined ways to describe
                                                                              i
  technological constraints in the previous chapter.

  M a r k e t constraints are those constraints that concern the effect of
  actions of other agents on the firm. For example, the consumers who
  buy output from the firm may only be willing to pay a certain price for
  a certain amount of output; similarly, the suppliers of a firm may accept
  only certain prices for their supplies of inputs.

   When the firm determines its optimal actions, it must take into account
both sorts of constraints. However, it is convenient to begin by examining
the constraints one a t a time. For this reason the firms described in the
following sections will exhibit the simplest kind of market behavior, namely
that of price-taking behavior. Each firm will be assumed t o take prices
as given, exogenous variables to the profit-maximizing problem. Thus, the
firm will be concerned only with determining the profit-maximizing levels
of outputs and inputs. Such a price-taking firm is often referred t o as a
competitive firm.
   The reason for this terminology will be discussed later on; however, we
can briefly indicate here the kind of situation where price-taking behavior
might be an appropriate model. Suppose we have a collection of well-
informed consumers who are buying a homogeneous product that is pro-
duced by a large number of firms. Then it is reasonably clear that all firms
must charge the same price for their product-any firm that charged more
than the going market price for its product would immediately lose all of
its customers. Hence, each firm must take the market price as given when
it determines its optimal policy. In this chapter we will study the optimal
choice of production plans, given a configuration of market prices.


2.1 Profit maximization

Let us consider the problem of a firm that takes prices as given in both its
output and its factor markets. Let p be a vector of prices for inputs and
outputs of the firm.l The profit maximization problem of the firm can be
stated as
                          4 ~= )max PY
                            such that y is in Y.
Since outputs are measured as positive numbers and inputs are measured
as negative numbers, the objective function for this problem is profits:
revenues minus costs. The function ~ ( p ) ,which gives us the maximum
profits as a function of the prices, is called the profit function of the firm.

  In general we will take prices to be row vectors and quantities to be column vectors.
26 PROFIT MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 2)


   There are several useful variants of the profit function. For example,
if we are considering a short-run maximization problem, we might define
the short-run profit function, also known as the restricted profit
function:
                        X(P,z) = max PY
                            such that y is in Y (z).
  If the firm produces only one output, the profit function can be written
as
                        ~ ( pW,) = max pf (x) - wx
where p is now the (scalar) price of output, w is the vector of factor prices,
and the inputs are measured by the (nonnegative) vector x = (XI,. . , xn).
In this case we can also define a variant of the restricted profit function,
the cost function

                        c(w,y) = min wx
                             such that x is in V(y).

In the short run, we may want to consider the restricted or short- run
cost function:

                    C(W,y, z) = min wx
                           such that (y, -x) is in Y (z).

The cost function gives the minimum cost of producing a level of output
y when factor prices are w. Since only the factor prices are taken as
exogenous in this problem, the cost function can be used to describe firms
that are price takers in factor markets but do not take prices as given in
the output markets. This observation will prove useful in our study of
monopoly.
  Profit-maximizing behavior can be characterized by calculus. For ex-
ample, the first-order conditions for the single output profit maximization




This condition simply says that the value of the marginal product of each
factor must be equal to its price. Using vector notation, we can also write
these conditions as
                              pDf (x*) = w.
Here


is the gradient of f : the vector of partial derivatives of f with respect to
each of its arguments.    "
                                                     PROFIT MAXIMIZATION   27


   The first-order conditions state that the "value marginal product of each
factor must be equal to its price." This is just a special case of the opti-
mization rule we stated earlier: that the marginal revenue of each action
be equal to its marginal cost.
   This first-order condition can also be exhibited graphically. Consider the
production possibilities set depicted in Figure 2.1. In this two-dimensional
case, profits are given by II = py - wx. The level sets of this function
for fixed p and w are straight lines which can be represented as functions
                       +
of the form: y = IIlp (w/p)x. Here the slope of the isoprofit line gives
the wage measured in units of output, and the vertical intercept gives us
profits measured in units of output.




                                             INPUT

     Profit maximization. The profit-maximizing amount of in-                   Figure
     put occurs where the slope of the isoprofit line equals the slope          2.1
     of the production function.


   A profit-maximizing firm wants to find a point on the production set
with the maximal level of profits-this is a point where the vertical axis
intercept of the associated isoprofit line is maximal. By inspection it can
be seen that such an optimal point can be characterized by the tangency
condition
                                df(x*)
                                --      -w -
                                 dx        p'
  In this two-dimensional case it is easy to see the appropriate second-order
condition for profit maximization, namely that the second derivative of the
production function with respect t o the input must be nonpositive:




Geometrically, this means that at a point of maximal profits the production
function must lie below its tangent line at x*; i.e., it must be "locally
28 PROFIT MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 2)


concave." It is often useful to assume that the second derivative will be
strictly negative.
   A similar second-order condition holds in the multiple-input case. In
this case the second-order condition for profit maximization is that the
matrix of second derivatives of the production function must be negative
semidefinite at the optimal point; that is, the second-order condition
requires that the Hessian matrix




must satisfy the condition that hD 2 f (x*)h t 5 0 for all vectors h. (The
superscript t indicates the transpose operation.) Note that if there is only
a single input, the Hessian matrix is a scalar and this condition reduces to
the second-order condition we examined earlier for the single-input case.
   Geometrically, the requirement that the Hessian matrix is negative semi-
definite means that the production function must be locally concave in the
neighborhood of an optimal choice-that is, the production function must
lie below its tangent hyperplane.
   In many applications we will be concerned with the case of a regular
maximum, so that the relevant condition to check is whether the Hessian
matrix is negative definite. In Chapter 26, page 476, we show that a nec-
essary and sufficient test for this is that the leading principal minors of
the Hessian must alternate in sign. This algebraic condition is sometimes
useful for checking second-order conditions, as we will see below.


2.2 Difficulties
For each vector of prices (p, w) there will in general be some optimal
choice of factors x*. The function that gives us the optimal choice of
inputs as a function of the prices is called the factor demand function
of the firm. This function is denoted by x(p, w). Similarly, the function
y(p, w) = f (x(p, w)) is called the supply function of the firm. We will
often assume that these functions are well-defined and nicely behaved, but
it is worthwhile considering problems that may arise if they aren't.
   First, it may happen that the technology cannot be described by a dif-
ferentiable production function, so that the derivatives described above are
inappropriate. The Leontief technology is a good example of this problem.
   Second, the calculus conditions derived above make sense only when
the choice variables can be varied in an open neighborhood of the optimal
choice. In many economic problems the variables are naturally nonnegative;
and if some variables have a value of zero at the optimal choice, the calculus
conditions described above may be inappropriate. The above conditions are
valid only for interior solutions-where each of the factors is used in a
positive amount.
                                                              DIFFICULTIES   29


  The necessary modifications of the conditions to handle boundary so-
lutions are not difficult to state. For example, if we constrain x to be
nonnegative in the profit maximization problem, the relevant first-order
conditions turn on% to be                     - 3




   Thus the marginal profit from ificreasing xi must be nonpositive, oth-
erwise the firm would increase xi. If xi = 0, the marginal profit from
increasing xi may be negative-which is to say, the firm would like to de-
crease xi. But since xi is already zero, this is impossible. Finally, if xi > 0
so that the nonnegativity constraint is not binding, we will have the usual
conditions for an interior solution.
   Cases involving nonnegativity constraints or other sorts of inequality
constraints can be handled formally by means of the Kuhn-Tucker Theorem
described in Chapter 27, page 503. We will present some examples of the
application of this theorem in the chapter on cost minimization.
   The third problem that can arise is that there may exist no profit-
maximizing production plan. For example, consider the case where the
production function is f (x) = x so that one unit of x produces one unit of
output. It is not hard to see that for p > w no profit-maximizing plan will
exist. If you want to maximize px - wx when p > w, you would want to
choose an indefinitely large value of x. A maximal profit production plan
will exist for this technology only when p 5 w, in which case the maximal
level of profits will be zero.
   In fact, this same phenomenon will occur for any constant-returns-to-
scale technology. To demonstrate this, suppose that we can find some
(p,w) where optimal profits are strictly positive so that

                          p f(x*)- w x * = x* > 0.

Suppose that we scale up production by a factor t > 1; our profits will now
be
             pf (tx*)- wtx* = tlpf(x*)- wx*]= tx* > x*.
This means that, if profits are ever positive, they can be made larger-
hence, profits are unbounded and no maximal profit production plan will
exist in this case.
   It is clear from this example that the only nontrivial profit-maximizing
position for a constant-returns-to-scale firm is one involving zero profits.
If the firm is producing some positive level of output and it makes zero
profits, then it is indifferent about the level of output at which it produces.
30 PROFIT MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 2)

  This brings up the fourth difficulty: even when a profit-maximizing pro-
duction plan exists, it may not be unique. If (y, x) yields maximal profits
of zero for some constant returns technology, then (ty, tx) will also yield
zero profits and will therefore also be profit-maximizing. In the case of
constant returns to scale, if there exists a profit-maximizing choice at some
(p, w ) at all, there will typically be a whole range of production plans that
are profit-maximizing.



EXAMPLE: The profit function for Cobb-Douglas technology

Consider the problem of maximizing profits for the production function of
the form f(x) = x a where a > 0. The first-order condition is




and the second-order condition reduces to




The second-order condition can only be satisfied when a 5 1, which means
that the production function must have constant or decreasing returns to
scale for competitive profit maximization to be meaningful.
   If a 2 1, the first-order condition reduces to p = w. Hence, when w = p
any value of x is a profit-maximizing choice. When a < 1, we use the
first-order condition to solve for the factor demand function




The supply function is given by




and the profit function is given by
                             PROPERTIES OF DEMAND AND SUPPLY FUNCTIONS         31



2.3 Properties of demand and supply functions
The functions that give the optimal choices of inputs and outputs as a func-
tion of the prices are known as the factor d e m a n d and o u t p u t s u p p l y
functions. The fact that these functions are the solutions to a maximiza-
tion problem of a specific form, the profit maximization problem, will imply
certain restrictions on the behavior of the demand and supply functions.
   For example, it is easy to see that if we multiply all of the prices by some
positive number t , the vector of factor inputs that maximizes profits will
not change. (Can you prove this rigorously?) Hence, the factor demand
functions x,(p, w) for i = 1, . . . , n must satisfy the restriction that


In other words the factor demand functions must be homogeneous of degree
zero. This property is an important implication of profit-maximizing be-
havior: an immediate way to check whether some observed behavior could
come from the profit-maximizing model is to see if the demand functions
are homogeneous of degree zero. If they aren't, the firm in question couldn't
possibly be maximizing profits.
   We would like t o find other such restrictions on demand functions. In
fact, we would like to find a complete list of such restrictions. We could
use such a list in two ways. First, we could use it to examine theoretical
statements about how a profit-maximizing firm would respond to changes
in its economic environment. An example of such a statement would be:
"If all prices are doubled, the levels of goods demanded and supplied by a
profit-maximizing firm will not change." Second, we could use such restric-
tions empirically to decide whether a particular firm's observed behavior is
consistent with the profit maximization model. If we observed that some
firm's demands and supplies changed when all prices doubled and nothing
else changed, we would have t o conclude (perhaps reluctantly) that this
firm was not a profit maximizer.
   Thus both theoretical and empirical considerations suggest the impor-
tance of determining the properties that demand and supply functions pos-
sess. We will attack this problem in three ways. The first way is by exam-
ining the first-order conditions that characterize the optimal choices. The
second approach is t o examine the maximizing properties of the demand
and supply functions directly. The third way is to examine the properties
of the profit and cost functions and relate these properties to the demand
functions. This approach is sometimes referred to as the "dual approach."
Each of these methods of examining optimizing behavior is useful for other
sorts of problems in economics, and the manipulations involved should be
carefully studied.
   Economists refer to the study of how an economic variable responds to
changes in its environment as comparative statics. For example, we
32 PROFIT MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 2)


could ask how the supply of output of a profit-maximizing firm responds
to a change in the output price. This would be part of a study of the
comparative statics of the supply function.
   The term comparative refers to comparing a "before" and an "after"
situation. The term statics refers to the idea that the comparison is made
after all adjustments have been "worked out;" that is, we must compare
one equzlibrium situation to another.
   The term "comparative statics" is not especially descriptive, and it seems
to be used only by economists. A better term for this sort of analysis
would be sensitivity analysis. This has the additional advantage that
this term is used in other fields of study. However, the comparative statics
terminology is the traditional one in economics and seems so embedded in
economic analysis that it would be futile to attempt to change it.


2.4 Comparative statics using the first-order conditions

Let us first consider the simple example of a firm maximizing profits with
one output and one input. The problem facing the firm is

                             max pf (x) - WX.
                                 2


  If f (x) is differentiable, the demand function r(p, $) must satisfy the
necessary first-order and second-order conditions

                           pft(xCp, w)) - w r 0
                                 pf "(x(P, w)) 1 0-

   Notice that these conditions are an identity in p and w. Since x(p, w)
is by definition the choice that maximizes profits at (p, w), x(p, w) must
satisfy the necessary conditions for profit maximization for all values of p
and w. Since the first-order condition is an identity, we can differentiate it
with respect to w, say, to get




Assuming that we have a regular maximum so that f1I(x) is not zero, we
can divide through to get




  This identity tells us some interesting facts about how the factor demand
x(p, w) responds to changes in w. First, it gives us an explicit expression
                  COMPARATIVE STATICS USING THE FIRST-ORDER CONDITIONS     33

for dxldw in terms of the production function. If the production func-
tion is very curved in a neighborhood of the optimum-so that the second
derivative is large in magnitudethen the change in factor demand as the
factor price changes will be small. (You might draw a diagram similar to
Figure 2.1 and experiment a bit to verify this fact.)
   Second, it gives us important information about the sign of the deriva-
tive: since the second-order condition for maximization implies that the
second derivative of the production function, fl'(x(p, w)), is negative, equa-
tion (2.1) implies that dx(p, w)/dw is negative. In other words: the factor
demand curve slopes downward.
   This procedure of differentiating the first-order conditions can be used to
examine profit-maximizing behavior when there axe many inputs. Let us
consider for simplicity the case of two inputs. For notational convenience
we will normalize p = 1 and just look at how the factor demands behave
with respect to the factor prices. The factor demand functions must satisfy
the first-order conditions




Differentiating with respett to wl, we have




Differentiating with respect to w2, we have




Writing these equations in matrix form yields




Let us assume that we have a regular maximum. This means that the Hes-
sian matrix is strictly negative definite, and therefore nonsingular. (This
assumption is analogous to the assumption that fl'(x) < 0 in the one-
dimensional case.) Solving for the matrix of first derivatives, we have
34 PROFIT MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 2)


   The matrix on the left of this last equation is known as a s u b s t i t u t i o n
m a t r i x since it describes how the firm substitutes one input for another
as the factor prices change. According t o our calculation, the substitu-
tion matrix is simply the inverse of the Hessian matrix. This has several
important implications.
   Recall that the second-order condition for (strict) profit maximization is
that the Hessian matrix is a symmetric negative definite matrix. It is a
standard result of linear algebra that the inverse of a symmetric negative
definite matrix is a symmetric negative definite matrix. This means that
the substitution matrix itself must be a symmetric, negative definite matrix.
In particular:

  1) dx,/dw,< 0, for i = 1,2, since the diagonal entries of a negative
  definite matrix must be negative.

  2) dx,/dw,= dx,/dw,by the symmetry of the matrix.
   Although it is quite intuitive that the factor demand curves should have
a negative slope, the fact that the substitution matrix is symmetric is not
very intuitive. Why should the change in a firm's demands for good i when
price j changes necessarily be equal t o the change in the firm's demand
for good j when price i changes? There is no obvious reason . . . but it is
implied by the model of profit-maximizing behavior.
  The same sorts of calculations can be made for an arbitrary number of in-
puts. Normalizing p = 1, the first-order conditions for profit maximization
are
                             Df (x(w)) - w E 0 .
If we differentiate with respect to w , we get



Solving this equation for the substitution matrix, we find



Since D2 f ( ~ ( w )is) a symmetric negative definite matrix, the substitution
matrix D x ( w ) is a symmetric negative definite matrix. This formula is,
of course, a natural analog of the one-good and two-good cases described
above.
   What is the empirical content of the statement that the substitution ma-
trix is negative semidefinite? We can provide the following interpretation.
Suppose that the vector of factor prices change from w to w d w . Then+
the associated change in the factor demands is
                                       .-
                                       -.


                                      COMPARATIVE STATICS USING ALGEBRA     35

Multiplying both sides of this equation by d w yields



The inequality follows from the definition of a negative semidefinite matrix.
We see that negative semidefiniteness of the substitution matrix means that
the inner product of the change in factor prices and the change in factor
demands must always be nonpositive, at least for infinitesimal changes in
factor prices. If, for example, the price of the i th factor increases, and
no other prices change, it follows that the demand for the ith factor must
decrease. In general, the change in quantities, d x , must make an obtuse
angle with the change in prices, d w . Roughly speaking, the direction of
the quantity change must be more-or-less "opposite" the direction of the
price change.



2.5 Comparative statics using algebra

In this section we will examine the consequences of profit-maximizing be-
havior that follow directly from the definition of maximization itself. We
will do this in a slightly different setting than before. Instead of taking the
behavior of the firm as being described by its demand and supply func-
tions, we will think of just having a finite number of observations on a
firm's behavior. This allows us to avoid some tedious details involved in
taking limits and gives us a more realistic setting for empirical analysis.
(Who has ever had an infinite amount of data anyway?)
   Thus, suppose that we are given a list of observed price vectors p t , and
the associated net output vectors yt, for t = 1,. . . , T . We refer to this
collection as the data. In terms of the net supply functions we described
before, the data are just ( p t , y(pt)) for some observations t = 1,. . . , T.
   The first question we will ask is what the model of profit maximization
implies about the set of data. If the firm is maximizing profits, then the
observed net output choice at price p t must have a level of profit at least as
great as the profit at any other net output the firm could have chosen. We
don't know all the other choices that are feasible in this situation, but we
do know some of them-namely, the other choices y S for s = 1,. . . , T that
we have observed. Hence, a necessary condition for profit maximization is
that
                   ptyt 2 ptyS for all t and s = 1, ..., T.

We will refer to this condition as the Weak Axiom of Profit Maximiza-
tion (WAPM).
  In Figure 2.2A we have drawn two observations that violate WAPM,
while Figure 2.2B depicts two observations that satisfy WAPM.
         36 PROFll MAXlMlZATlON (Ch. 2)

                         A                                       B
                                     ~~                                             OUTPUT




                                     I                                          I
          INPUT                                   INPUT

Figure            WAPM. Panel A shows two observations that violate WAPM,
2.2               since p1y2 > l . Panel B shows two observations that satisfy
                  WAPM.
           WAPM is a simple, but very useful, condition; let us derive some of its
         consequences. Fix two observations t and s, and write WAPM for each
         one. We have
                                     p t ( y t - yS) 2 0
                                  - p y y t - yS) 0.      >
         Adding these two inequalities gives us


         Letting A p = (p t - p S ) and Ay = (y t - y s ), we can rewrite this expression
         w
                                           ApAy    > 0.                                (2.2)
         In other words, the znner product of a vector of price changes with the
          assoczated vector of changes i n net outputs must be nonnegative.
            For example, if A p is the vector (1,0,.. . , O), then this inequality implies
         that Ayl must be nonnegative. If the first good is an output good for
         the firm, and thus a positive number, then the supply of that good cannot
         decrease when its price rises. On the other hand, if the first good is an input
         for the firm, and thus measured as a negative number, then the demand
         for that good must not increase when its price goes up.
            Of course, equation (2.2) is simply a "delta" version of the infinitesimal
         inequality derived in the previous section. But it is stronger in that it
         applies for all changes in prices, not just infinitesimal changes. Note that
         (2.2) follows directly from the definition of profit maximization and that
         no regularity assumptions about the technology are necessary.


         2.6 Recoverability
         Does WAPM exhaust all of the implications of profit-maximizing behavior,
         or are there other useful conditions implied by profit maximization? One
way to answer this question is to try ts amt%mcta technology that gen-
erates the observed behavior (p t , y t ) as profit-maximizing behavior. If we
can find such a technology for any set of data that satisfy WAPM, then
WAPM must indeed exhaust the implications of profit-maximizing behav-
ior. We refer to the operation of constructing a technology consistent with
the observed choices as the operation of recoverability.
   We will show that if a set of data satisfies WAPM it is always possible
to find a technology for which the observed choices are profit-maximizing
choices. In fact, it is always possible to find a production set Y that is
closed and convex. The remainder of this section will sketch the proof of
this assertion.
   Our task is to construct a production set that will generate the observed
choices (p t ,y t ) as profit-maximizing choices. We will actually construct
two such productioh sets, one that serves as an "inner bound" to the true
technology and one that serves as an "outer bound." We start with the
inner bound.
  Suppose that the true production set Y is convex and monotonic. Since ,
Y must contain yt for t = 1,.. . , T, it is natural to take the inner bound to
be the smallest convex, monotonic set that contains yl, . . . , yt. This set is
called the convex, monotonic hull of the points y l , . . . , yT and is denoted
by
             YI- c ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ . ~ d f ~ ~ : t = i , .
The set Y I is depicted in Figure 2.3A.


                                 OUTPUT                                  OUTPUT




INPUT                                     INPUT


        T h e sets Y I and YO. The st% Yl is the smallest convex,                 Figure
        monotonic set that could be a production set consistent with              2.3
        the data. The set YO is the largest convex, monotonic set that
        could be a production set consistent with the data.


  It b easy to show that for the technology YI,yt is a profit-maximizing
choice at prices p t . All we have to do is to check that for all t,

                         PtYt 2 p t y for all y in Y I .
38 PROFIT MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 2)

   Suppose that this is not the case. Then for some observation t, ptyt <
p t y for some y in YI. But inspecting the diagram shows that there must
then exist some observation s such that ptyt < ptyS. But this inequality
violates WAPM.
   Thus the set Y I rationalizes the observed behavior in the sense that it
is one possible technology that could have generated that behavior. It is
not hard to see that Y I must be contained in any convex technology that
generated the observed behavior: if Y generated the observed behavior and
it is convex, then it must contain the observed choices yt and the convex
hull of these points is the smallest such set. In this sense, Y I gives us an
"inner bound" to the true technology that generated the observed choices.
   It is natural to ask if we can find an outer bound to this "true" technology.
That is, can we find a set YO that is guaranteed to contain any technology
that is consistent with the observed behavior?             o
   The trick to answering this question is to rule out all of the points that
couldn't possibly be in the true technology and then take everything that
is left over. More precisely, let us define NOTY by

                   NOTY = {y : pty > ptyt for some t).

  NOTY consists of all those net output bundles that yield higher profits
than some observed choice. If the firm is a profit maximizer, such bundles
couldn't be technologically feasible; otherwise they would have been chosen.
Now as our outer bound to Y we just take the complement of this set:
                                               /




                Y O = { y : p t y I ptyt for all t = l , . . . , T ).

The set YO is depicted in Figure 2.3B.
   In order to show that YO rationalizes the observed behavior we must
show that the profits at the observed choices are at least as great as the
profits at any other y in YO. Suppose not. Then there is some yt such
that ptyt < p t y for some y in YO. But this contradicts the definition of
YO given above.
   It is clear from the construction of YO that it must contain any produc-
tion set consistent with the data ( y t ) . Hence, YO and Y I form the tightest
inner and outer bounds to the true production set that generated the data.


Notes

For more on comparative statics methodology, see Silberberg (1974) and
Silberberg (1990). The algebraic approach described here was inspired
by Afriat (1967) and Samuelson (1947); for further development see Var-
ian (1982b).
Exercises

2.1. Use the Kuhn-Tucker theorem t o derive conditions for profit maximiza-
tion and cost minimization that are valid even for boundary solutions, i.e.,
when some factor is not used.

2.2. Show that a profit-maximizing bundle will typically not exist for a
technology that exhibits increasing returns t o scale as long as there is some
                                       '
point that yields a positive profit.

2.3. Calculate explicitly the profit function for the technology y = xa, for
0 < a < 1 and verify that it is homogeneous and convex in (p, w).

2.4. Let f (xl, x2) be a production function with two factors and let wl and
wz be their respective prices. Show that the elasticity of the factor share
(w2x2/wlxl) with respect to (xl/xz) is given by l/a - 1.

2.5. Show that the elasticity of the factor share with respect t o (w2/wl) is
1 - a.

2.6. Let (p t, yt ) for t = 1, . . . , T be a set of observed choices that satisfy
WAPM, and let Y I and YO be the inner and outer bounds to the true
production set Y. Let ~ + ( pbe) the profit function associated with YO
and .rr-(p) be the profit function associated with Y I , and ~ ( pbe  ) the profit
                                                              >
function associated with Y. Show that for all p, .rr+(p) ~ ( p2) .rr-(p).

2.7. The production function is f (x) = 202 - x 2 and the price of output is
normalized t o 1. Let w be the price of the x-input. We must have x 2 0.

  (a) What is the first-order condition for profit maximization if x > O?

  (b) For what values of w will the optimal x be zero?

  (c) For what values of w will the optimal x be lo?

  (d) What is the factor demand function?-

  (e) What is the profit function?

  (f) What is the derivative of the profit function with respect to w?
                        CHAPTER             3
                 PROFIT
               FUNCTION

Given any production set Y, we have seen how to calculate the profit
function, ~ ( p ) ,
                 which gives us the maximum profit attainable a t prices
p . The profit function possesses several important properties that follow
directly from its definition. These properties are very useful for analyzing
profit-maximizing behavior.
   Recall that the profit function is, by definition, the maximum profits the
firm can make as a function of the vector of prices of the net outputs:


                             such that y is in Y.
From the viewpoint of the mathematical results that follow, what is im-
portant is that the objective function in this problem is a linear function
of prices.


3.1 Properties of the profit function
We begin by outlining the properties of the profit function. It is important
t o recognize that these properties follow solely from the assumption of
profit maximization. No assumptions about convexity, monotonicity, or
other sorts of regularity are necessary.
                                           PROPERTIES OF THE PROFIT FUNCTION    41


P r o p e r t i e s of t h e profit function.

1 ) Nondecmsing i n output prices, nonincreasing in input prices. If p:        > pa
                                                           >
for all outputs and p; 5 pJ for all znputs, then ~ ( p ' ) ~ ( p ) .

                                                  for all t 2 0.
2) Homogeneous of degree 1 in p. ~ ( t p=) t ~ ( p )

3) Convex in p. Let pl' = t p        + ( 1 - t ) p l for 0 It < 1. Then n(p1') 5
t.(p) + ( 1 - t ) r ( p ' ) .

4 ) Continuous i n p. The functzon ~ ( pzs) continuous, at least when ~ ( p )
is well-defined and pi > 0 for i = 1,. . . , n .

Proof. We emphasize once more that the proofs of these properties follow
from the definition of the profit function alone and do not rely on any
properties of the technology.

1) Let y be a profit-maximizing net output vector at p, so that ~ ( p=) py
and let y' be a profit-maximizing net output vector a t pi so that ~ ( p '=)
p'y'. Then by definition of profit maximization we have ply'       >p'y. Since
pi >    p, for all i for which y,   >
                                    0 and p:       <
                                                pa for all i for which y, 5 0,
we also have ply     >   py. Putting these two inequalities together, we have
               >
r ( p l )= ply1 py = ~ ( p )as, required.

2) Let y be a profit-maximizing net output vector at p, so that py py'    >
                                          >            >
for all y' in Y. It follows that for t 0, t p y tpy' for all y' in Y. Hence
y also maximizes profits a t prices t p . Thus 7r(tp)= t p y = t ~ ( p ) .

3) Let y maximize profits a t p. y' maximize profits a t p', and y" maximize
profits at p". Then we have



By the definition of profit maximization, we know that




Adding these two inequalities and using (3.1),we have



as required.

4) The continuity of ~ ( p )
                          follows from the Theorem of the Maximum de-
scribed in Chapter 27, page 506. 1
         42 PROFIT FUNCTION (Ch. 3)


            The facts that the profit function is homogeneous of degree 1 and increas-
         ing in output prices are not terribly surprising. The convexity property,
         on the other hand, does not appear to be especially intuitive. Despite this
         appearance there is a sound economic rationale for the convexity result,
         which turns out to have very important consequences.
            Consider the graph of profits versus the price of a single output good,
         with the factor prices held constant, as depicted in Figure 3.1. At the
         price vector (p*, w*) the profit-maximizing production plan (y*, x*) yields
         profits p*y*- w*x*. Suppose that p increases, but the firm continues to use
         the same production plan (y*,x*). Call the profits yielded by this passive
         behavior the "passive profit function" and denote it by II(p) = py* - w*x*.
         This is easily seen to be a straight line. The profits from pursuing an
         optimal policy must be at least as large as the profits from pursuing the
         passive policy, so the graph of n(p) must lie above the graph of II(p). The
         same argument can be repeated for any price p, so the profit function must
         lie above its tangent lines at every point. It follows that ~ ( p )
                                                                           must be a
         convex function.



         PROFITS I                    n(p)




Figure          The profit function. As the output price increases, the profit
3.1             function increases at an increasing rate.




           The properties of the profit function have several uses. At this point
         we will satisfy ourselves with the observation that these properties offer
         several observable implications of profit-maximizing behavior. For example,
         suppose that we have access to accounting data for some firm and observe
         that when all prices are scaled up by some factor t > 0 profits do not
         scale up proportionally. If there were no other apparent changes in the
         environment, we might suspect that the firm in question is not maximizing
         profits.
               SUPPLY AND DEMAND FUNCTIONS FROM THE PROFIT FUNCTION         43



EXAMPLE: The effects of price stabilization

Suppose that a competitive industry faces a randomly fluctuating price for
its output. For simplicity we imagine that the price of output will be pl
with probability q and p2 with probability (1 - 9). It has been suggested
that it may be desirable t o stabilize the price of output at the average price
        +
p = qpl ( 1 - q)pz. How would this affect profits of a typical firm in the
industry?
   We have to compare average profits when p fluctuates to the profits at
the average price. Since the profit function is convex,



Thus average profits with a fluctuating price are a t least as large as with a
stabilized price.
   At first this result seems counterintuitive, but when we remember the
economic reason for the convexity of the profit function it becomes clear.
Each firm will produce more output when the price is high and less when
the price is low. The profit from doing this will exceed the profits from
producing a fixed amount of output a t the average price.


3.2 Supply and demand functions from the profit function
If we are given the net supply function y ( p ) , it is easy to calculate the
profit function. We just substitute into the definition of profits to find



Suppose that instead we are given the profit function and are asked to find
the net supply functions. How can that be done? It turns out that there
is a very simple way to solve this problem: just differentiate the profit
function. The proof that this works is the content of the next proposition.

Hotelling's lemma. (The denvatzve property) Let y,(p) be the firm's
net supply functzon for good i. Then




assumzng that the denvatzve exzsts and that p, > 0.

Proof. Suppose (y*) is a profit-maximizing net output vector at prices
( p * ) . Then define the function
44 PROFIT FUNCTION (Ch. 3)

Clearly, the profit-maximizing production plan at prices p will always be
at least as profitable as the production plan y*. However, the plan y*
will be a profit-maximizing plan at prices p*, so the function g reaches a
minimum value of 0 at p*. The assumptions on prices imply this is an
interior minimum.
   The first-order conditions for a minimum then imply that




Since this is true for all choices of p*, the proof is done. I

  The above proof is just an algebraic version of the relationships depicted
in Figure 3.1. Since the graph of the "passive" profit line lies below the
graph of the profit function and coincides at one point, the two lines must
be tangent at that point. But this implies that the derivative of the profit
function at p* must equal the profit-maximizingfactor supply at that price:
Y(P*)= d4p*)laP.
  The argument given for the derivative property is convincing (I hope!)
but it may not be enlightening. The following argument may help to see
what is going on.
  Let us consider the case of a single output and a single input. In this
case the first-order condition for a maximum profit takes the simple form




The factor demand function x(p, w) must satisfy this first-order condition.
  The profit function is given by



Differentiating the profit function with respect to w, say, we have




Substituting from (3.2), we see that




The minus sign comes from the fact that we are increasing the price of an
i n p u t s o profits must decrease.
                                                     THE ENVELOPE THEOREM    45


   This argument exhibits the economic rationale behind Hotelling's lemma.
When the price of an output increases by a small amount there will be two
effects. First, there is a direct effect: because of the price increase the firm
will make more profits, even if it continues to produce the same level of
output.
   But secondly, there will be an indirect effect: the increase in the output
price will induce the firm to change its level of output by a small amount.
However, the change in profits resulting from any infinitesimal change in
output must be zero since we are already at the profit-maximizing produc-
tion plan. Hence, the impact of the indirect effect is zero, and we are left
only with the direct effect.


3.3 The envelope theorem
The derivative property of the profit function is a special case of a more
general result known as the envelope t h e o r e m , described in Chapter 27,
page 491. Consider an arbitrary maximization problem where the objective
function depends on some parameter a:

                            M ( a ) = max f (x,a).

The function M(a) gives the maximized value of the objective function as
a function of the parameter a. In the case of the profit function a would
be some price, x would be some factor demand, and M ( a ) would be the
maximized value of profits as a function of the price.
  Let x(a) be the value of x that solves the maximization problem. Then
we can also write M(a) = f (x(a),a). This simply says that the optimized
value of the function is equal to the function evaluated at the optimizing
choice.
  It is often of interest to know how M ( a ) changes as a changes. The
envelope theorem tells us the answer:




This expression says that the derivative of M with respect t o a is given by
the partial derivative of f with respect to a , holdzng x fixed at the optimal
chozce. This is the meaning of the vertical bar to the right of the derivative.
The proof of the envelope theorem is a relatively straightforward calculation
given in Chapter 27, page 491. (You should try to prove the result yourself
before you look at the answer.)
  Let's see how the envelope theorem works in the case of a simple one-
input, one-output profit maximization problem. The profit maximization
problem is
                         ~ ( pw), = max pf (x) - wx.
                                     x
46 PROFIT FUNCTION (Ch. 3)


The a in the envelope theorem is p or w, and M(a) is ~ ( p ,
                                                          w). According to
the envelope theorem, the derivative of ~ ( pw)
                                              , with respect to p is simply
the partial derivative of the objective function, evaluated at the optimal
choice:
                                                 =f( 4 ~ 7
                                                        w)).
                                      "="(P,w)

This is simply the profit-maximizing supply of the firm at prices (p, w).
Similarly,



which is the profit-maximizing net supply of the factor.


3.4 Comparative statics using the profit function

At the beginning of this chapter we proved that the profit function must
satisfy certain properties. We have just seen that the net supply functions
are the derivatives of the profit function. It is of interest to see what
the properties of the profit function imply about the properties of the net
supply functions. Let us examine the properties one by one.
   First, the profit function is a monotonic function of the prices. Hence,
the partial derivative of ~ ( p ) with respect to price i will be negative if
good i is an input and positive if good i is an output. This is simply the
sign convention for net supplies that we have adopted.
   Second, the profit function is homogeneous of degree 1 in the prices. We
have seen that this implies that the partial derivatives of the profit function
must be homogeneous of degree 0. Scaling all prices by a positive factor t
won't change the optimal choice of the firm, and therefore profits will scale
by the same factor t.
   Third, the profit function is a convex function of p. Hence, the matrix
of second derivatives of 7r with respect to p--the Hessian matrix-must
be a positive semidefinite matrix. But the matrix of second derivatives of
the profit function is just the matrix of f i r s t derivatives of the net supply
functions. In the two-good case, for example, we have




The matrix on the right is just the substitution matrix-how the net supply
of good i changes as the price of good j changes. It follows from the
properties of the profit function that this must be a symmetric, positive
semidefinite matrix.
                         COMPARATIVE STATICS USING THE PROFIT FUNCTION    47


  The fact that the net supply functions are the derivatives of the profit
function gives us a handy way to move between properties of the profit
function and properties of the net supply functions. Many propositions
about profit-maximizing behavior become much easier to derive by using
this relationship.


EXAMPLE: The LeChatelier principle

Let us consider the short-run response of a firm's supply behavior as com-
pared to the long-run response. It seems plausible that the firm will re-
spond more to a price change in the long run since, by definition, it has
more factors to adjust in the long run than in the short run. This intuitive
proposition can be proved rigorously.
   For simplicity, we suppose that there is only one output and that the
input prices are all fixed. Hence the profit function only depends on the
(scalar) price of output. Denote the short-run profit function by .rrs(p, z )
where z is some factor that is fixed in the short run. Let the long-run
profit-maximizing demand for this factor be given by z(p) so that the long-
run profit function is given by .rrL(p)= rs(p, z(p)). Finally, let p* be some
given output price, and let z* = ~ ( p * )
                                        be the optimal long-run demand for
the z-factor at p*.
   The long-run profits are always at least as large as the short-run profits
since the set of factors that can be adjusted in the long run includes the
subset of factors that can be adjusted in the short run. It follows that



for all prices p. At the price p* the difference between the short-run and
long-run profits is zero, so that h(p) reaches a minimum at p = p*. Hence,
the first derivative must vanish at p*. By Hotelling's lemma, we see that
the short-run and the long-run net supplies for each good must be equal
at p*.
  But we can say more. Since p* is in fact a minimum of h(p), the second
derivative of h(p) is nonnegative. This means that




Using Hotelling's lemma once more, it follows that




This expression implies that the long-run supply response to a change in
price is at least as large as the short-run supply response at z* = z(p*).
48 PROFIT FUNCTION (Ch. 3)


Notes

The properties of the profit function were developed by Hotelling (1932),
Hicks (1946), and Samuelson (1947).


Exercises

3.1. A competitive profit-maximizingfirm has a profit function ~ ( ~ 1 , 2 0=
                                                                            2)
        +
41(wl) 42(w2). The price of output is normalized to be 1.
  (a) What do we know about the first and second derivatives of the
functions 4i (wi)?

   (b) If xi(wl, w2) is the factor demand function for factor i, what is the
sign of axi/dwj?

  (c) Let f (xl, 22) be the production function that generated the profit
function of this form. What can we say about the form of this production
function? (Hint: look at the first-order conditions.)

3.2. Consider the technology described by y = 0 for x 5 1 and y = lnx for
x > 1. Calculate the profit function for this technology.

                                                          +
3.3. Given the production function f (xl, x2) = a1 ln xl a2 ln x2, calcu-
late the profit-maximizing demand and supply functions, and the profit
function, For simplicity assume an interior solution. Assume that ai > 0.

3.4. Given the production function f (xl, x2) = X ~ ' X ~ ~ ,
                                                        calculate the profit-
maximizing demand and supply functions, and the profit function. Assume
ai > 0. What restrictions must a1 and a2 satisfy?

3.5. Given the production function f (xl, x2) = min{xl, x ~ ) ~ ,
                                                             calculate the
profit-maximizing demand and supply functions, and the profit function.
What restriction must a satisfy?
                        CHAPTER             4
          COST
      MINIMIZATION

In this chapter we will study the behavior of a cost-minimizing firm. This
is of interest for two reasons: first it gives us another way to look a t the
supply behavior of a firm facing competitive output markets, and second,
the cost function allows us to model the production behavior of firms that
don't face competitive output markets. In addition, the analysis of cost
minimization gives us a taste of the analytic methods used in examining
constrained optimization problems.


4.1 Calculus analysis of cost minimization
Let us consider the problem of finding a cost-minimizing way t o produce a
given level of output:
                                 min wx
                                   X

                            such that f (x) = y.
We analyze this constrained minimization problem using the method of
Lagrange multipliers. Begin by writing the Lagrangian
50 COST MINIMIZATION (Ch. 4)


and differentiate it with respect to each of the choice variables, xi, and
the Lagange multiplier, A. The first-order conditions characterizing an
interior solution x* are

                             af (x*)= 0 for i = 1,...,n
                     wi - A------
                                  axi


These conditions can also be written in vector notation. Letting Df (x) be
the gradient vector, the vector of partial derivatives of f (x), we can write
the derivative conditions as

                                w = ADf (x*).

We can interpret these first-order conditions by dividing the ith condition
by the jth condition to get




   The right-hand side of this expression is the technical rate of substitution,
the rate at which factor j can be substituted for factor i while maintaining
a constant level of output. The left-hand side of this expression is the
economic rate of substitution-at what rate factor j can be substituted
for factor i while maintaining a constant cost. The conditions given above
require that the technical rate of substitution be equal to the economic rate
of substitution. If this were not so, there would be some kind of adjustment
that would result in a lower cost way of producing the same output.
   For example, suppose




Then if we use one unit less of factor i and one unit more of factor j ,
output remains essentially unchanged but costs have gone down. For we
have saved two dollars by hiring one unit less of factor i and incurred an
additional cost of only one dollar by hiring more of factor j .
  This first-order condition can also be represented graphically. In Fig-
ure 4.1, the curved lines represent isoquants and the straight lines represent
constant cost curves. When y is fixed, the problem of the firm is to find
a cost-minimizing point on a given isoquant. The equation of a constant
                       +
cost curve, C = wlxl ~ 2 x 2 ,can be written as x2 = C/w2 - (w1/w2)x1.
For fixed wl and wz the firm wants to find a point on a given isoquant
                                CALCULUS ANALYSIS OF COST MINIMIZATION     51

FACTOR 2 1




       Cost minimization.      At a point that minimizes costs, the              Figure
       isoquant must be tangent to the constant cost line.                       4.1
where the associated constant cost curve has minimal vertical intercept. It
is clear that such a point will be characterized by the tangency condition
that the slope of the constant cost curve must be equal t o the slope of the
isoquant. Substituting the algebraic expressions for these two slopes gives
us equation (4.1).
   Examination of Figure 4.1 indicates that there is also a second-order
condition that must be satisfied at a cost-minimizing choice, namely, that
the isoquant must lie above the isocost line. Another way to say this
is that any change in factor inputs that keeps costs constant-that is,
a movement along the isocost line-must result in output decreasing or
remaining constant.
   What are the local implications of this condition? Let ( h l ,h2)be a small
change in factors 1 and 2 and consider the associated change in output.
Assuming the necessary differentiability, we can write the second-order
Taylor series expansion




This is more conveniently written in matrix form as



                                 1
                                                             (k:).
                                                 fll   fl2
                                +,(hl      h2)(f2'     f2J

                                                                 +
A change (hl, h2)that keeps costs constant must satisfy wl hl w2h2 = 0.
Substituting for w, from the first-order condition for cost minimization, we
can write this as
52 COST MINIMIZATION (Ch.4)


Hence, the first-order terms in this Taylor expansion must vanish for move-
ments along the isocost line. Thus, the requirement that output decreases
for any movement along the isocost line can be stated as


                            ( h1 h2 ) (fZl
                                          fll     f12
                                                  fZ2)   (k: )
               for all (hl, h2) such that ( f l    f2)   (k:)    = 0.


Intuitively, at the cost-minimizing point, a first-order movement tangent
t o the isocost curve implies output remains constant, and a second-order
movement implies output decreases.
   This way of expressing the second-order condition generalizes to the n-
factor case; the appropriate second-order condition is that the Hessian
matrix of the production function is negative semidefinite subject t o a
linear constraint

               h t D 2f (x*)h 5 0 for all h satisfying w h = 0.



4.2 More on second-order conditions

In Chapter 27, page 498, we show that we can state the second-order con-
ditions in a way involving the Hessian matrix of the Lagrangian. Let us
apply that method to the case a t hand.
  In this case, the Lagrangian is



The first-order conditions for cost minimization are that the first derivative
of the Lagrangian with respect to A, X I , and x2 equals zero. The second-
order conditions involve the Hessian matrix of the Lagrangian,




  It is convenient t o use f,, to denote a2f /dx,dx3. Calculating the various
second derivatives and using this notation gives us
                                                                     DIFFICULTIES         53


This is the secalled b o r d e r e d Hessian matrix. It follows from Chap-
ter 27, page 498, that the second-order conditions stated in (4.2) can be
satisfied as a strict inequality if and only if the determinant of the bordered
Hessian is negative. This gives us a relatively simple condition to determine
whether or not the second-order conditions are satisfied in a particular case.
   In the general case, with n-factor demands, the second-order conditions
become a bit more complicated. In this case, we have to check the sign of
the determinants of certain submatrices of the bordered Hessian. See the
discussion in Chapter 27, page 498.
  Suppose, for example, that there are three factors of production. The
bordered Hessian will take the form



                                                                      I
                                      / 0     -f1     - f2    - f3    \
                                       -f1   -Xf11   -Xfi2   -Xfi3
      D 2 L ( X * , x;, x;, x;)   =                                                 (.I
                                       -f2   -Xf21   -Xf22   -Xf23
                                       -f3   -Xf31   -Xf32   -Xf33
The second-order conditions for the three-factor case then require that the
determinant of both (4.3) and (4.4) be negative when evaluated at the
optimal choice. If there are n factors, all of the bordered Hessians of this
form must be negative in order to have the second-order conditions satisfied
as strict inequalities.


4.3 Difficulties
For each choice of w and y there will be some choice of x* that minimizes
the cost of producing y units of output. We will call the function that
gives us this optimal choice the conditional factor d e m a n d function
and write it as x(w, y). Note that conditional factor demands depend on
the level of output produced as well as on the factor prices. The cost
function is the minimal cost a t the factor prices w and output level y;
that is, c(w, y) = wx(w, y).
   The first-order conditions are reasonably intuitive, but simply applying
the first-order conditions mechanically may lead to difficulties, as in the
case of profit maximization. Let us examine the four possible difficulties
that can arise with the profit maximization problem and see how they relate
to the cost minimization problem.
   First. the technology in question may not be representable by a differ-
entiable production function, so the calculus techniques cannot be applied.
The Leontief technology is a good example of this problem. We will calcu-
late its cost function below.
  The second problem is that the conditions are valid only for interior
operating positions; they must be modified if a cost minimization point
occurs on the boundary. The appropriate conditions turn out to be
54 COST MINIMIZATION (Ch. 4)




We will examine this problem further in the context of a specific example
below.
   The third problem in our discussion of profit maximization had to do
with the existence of a profit-maximizing bundle. However, this sort of
problem will not generally arise in the case of cost minimization. It is
known that a continuous function achieves a minimum and a maximum
value on a closed and bounded set. The objective function wx is certainly
a continuous function and the set V(y) is a closed set by hypothesis. All
that we need to establish is that we can restrict our attention to a bounded
subset of V(y). But this is easy. Just pick an arbitrary value of x, say
x'. Clearly the minimal cost factor bundle must have a cost less than wx'.
Hence, we can restrict our attention to the subset {x in V(y): wx 5 wx'),
which will certainly be a bounded subset, as long as w >> 0.
   The fourth problem is that the first-order conditions may not determine
a unique operating position for the firm. The calculus conditions are, after
all, only necessary conditions. Although they are usually sufficient for the
existence of local optimum, they will uniquely describe a global optimum
only under certain convexity condit ions-i.e., requiring V( y) to be convex
for cost minimization problems.


EXAMPLE: Cost function for the Cobb-Douglas technology

Consider the cost minimization problem


      9
                               such that A X Y X ~ = y.

Solving the constraint for 22, we see that this problem is equivalent to




The first-order condition is




which gives us the conditional demand function for factor 1:
                                                        DIFFICULTIES   55


The other conditional demand function is




The cost function is




   When we use the Cobb-Douglas technology for examples, we will usu-
ally measure units so that A = 1 and use the constant-returns-tescale
assumption that a + b = 1. In this case the cost function reduces to



where K = a - a ( l -


EXAMPLE: The cost function for the CES technology
                                   1
                  x2)= (xy+ 2;);. What is the associated cost function?
Suppose that f (xl,
The cost minimization problem is

                                           +
                               min wlxl w2x2
                                       +
                          such that x; x; = y P

The first-order conditions are




Solving the first two equations for xy and xg,we have




Substitute this into the production function to find
56 COST MINIMIZATION (Ch. 4)


Solve this for ( ~ ~   and )  3 into the system (4.5). This gives us
                           substitute
the conditional factor demand functions




Substituting these functions into the definition of the cost function yields




This expression looks a bit nicer if we set r = p / ( p - 1 ) and write




Note that this cost function has the same form as the original CES pro-
duction function with r replacing p. In the general case where



similar computations can be done to show that




EXAMPLE: The cost function for the Leontief technology

Suppose f ( x l , $ 2 ) = min{axl, bx2). What is the associated cost function?
Since we know that the firm will not waste any input with a positive price,
the firm must operate at a point where y = ax1 = bx2. Hence, if the firm
wants to produce y units of output, it must use yla units of good 1 and
ylb units of good 2 no matter what the input prices are. Hence, the cost
function is given by
                                                            DIFFICULTIES   57



EXAMPLE: The cost function for the linear technology

                                +
Suppose that f (xl, x2) = ax1 bxz, so that factors 1 and 2 are perfect
substitutes. What will the cost function look like? Since the two goods are
perfect substitutes, the firm will use whichever is cheaper. Hence, the cost
function will have the form c(wl, w2, y) = min{wl/a, w2/b)y.
   In this case the answer to the cost-minimization problem typically in-
volves a boundary solution: one of the two factors will be used in a zero
amount. Although it is easy to see the answer to this particular problem, it
is worthwhile presenting a more formal solution since it serves as a nice ex-
ample of the Kuhn-Tucker theorem in action. The Kuhn-Tucker theorem is
the appropriate tool to use here, since we will almost never have an interior
solution. See Chapter 27, page 503, for a statement of this theorem.
   For notational convenience we consider the special case where a = b = 1.
We pose the minimization problem as




The Lagrangian for this problem can be written as



The Kuhn-Tucker first-order conditions are




and the complementary slackness conditions are




  In order to determine the solution to this minimization problem, we have
to examine each of the possible cases where the inequality constraints are
binding or not binding. Since there are two constraints and each can be
binding or not binding, we have four cases to consider.
58 COST MINIMIZATION (Ch. 4)

  1) xl = 0, x2 = 0. In this case, we cannot satisfy the condition that
  xl   +
       22 = y unless y = 0.

  2) xl = 0, 52 > 0. In this case, we know that pg = 0. Hence, the first
  two first-order conditions give us




  Since pl   >0, this case can only arise when wl 2 w2. Since x 1 = 0, it
  follows that x2 = y.

  3) 22 = 0, xl > 0. Reasoning similar to that in the above case shows
  that xl = y and that this case can only occur when w2 2 wl.

  4) x1 > 0, 22 > 0. In this case, complementary slackness implies that
  p1 = 0, and p2 = 0. Thus, the first-order conditions imply that wl = w2.

  The above problem, though somewhat trivial, is typical of the methods
used in applying the Kuhn-Tucker theorem. If there are k constraints that
can be binding or not binding, there will be 2k configurations possible
at the optimum. Each of these must be examined t o see if it is actually
compatible with all of the required conditions in which case it represents a
potentially optimal solution.


4.4 Conditional factor demand functions
Let us now turn t o the cost minimization problem and the conditional factor
demands. Applying the usual arguments, the conditional factor demand
functions x(w, y) must satisfy the first-order conditions

                                      f (x(w1Y)) = Y
                            w - XDf(x(w,y)) = 0.
  It is easy to get lost in matrix algebra in the following calculations, so
we will consider a simple two-good example. In this case the first-order
conditions look like




Just as in the last chapter, these first-order conditions are i d e n t i t i e s b y
definition of the conditional factor demand functions they are true for all
                                CONDITIONAL FACTOR DEMAND FUNCTIONS        59


values of wl, w2, and y. Therefore, we can differentiate these identities with
respect to wl, say.
  We find
                                       af axl
                                     --+--=o       af ax,
                                     axl    awl   a x 2 awl




  These equations can be written in matrix form as




   Note the important fact that the matrix on the left-hand side is precisely
the bordered Hessian involved in the second-order conditions for maximiza-
tion. (See Chapter 27, page 498.) We can use a standard technique from
matrix algebra, Crarner's rule, which is discussed in Chapter 26, page 477,
to solve for dxl/awl:




   Let H be the determinant of the matrix in the denominator of this frac-
tion. We know that this is a negative number by the second-order condi-
tions for minimization. Carrying out the calculation in the numerator, we
have
                               3 = -f,2< o .
                              awl     H
Hence, the conditional factor demand curve slopes downward.
  Similarly, we can derive the expression for dx2/dwl. Applying Cramer's
rule again, we have
60 COST MINIMIZATION (Ch. 4)


Carrying out the indicated calculations,




  Repeating the same sorts of calculations for 6x1/aw2, we find




which im~lies


Comparing expressions (4.6) and (4.7), we see that they are identical. Thus
axl/8w2 equals dx2/awl. Just as in the case of profit maximization, we
find a symmetry condition: as a consequence of the model of cost mini-
mization the "cross-price effects must be equal."
   In the tweinput case under examination here, the sign of the cross-price
effect must be positive. That is, the two factors must be substitutes. This
is special to the tweinput case; if there are more factors of production, the
cross-price effect between any two of them can go either direction.
   We now proceed to rephrase the above calculations in terms of matrix
algebra. Since y will be held fixed in all the calculations, we will drop it as
an argument of the conditional factor demands for notational convenience.
The first-order conditions for cost minimization are




Differentiating these identities with respect to w we find:




Rearranging slightly gives us




Note that the matrix is simply the bordered Hessian matrix-i.e., the sec-
ond derivative matrix of the Lagrangian. Assuming that we have a regular
                                ALGEBRAIC APPROACH T O COST MINIMIZATION   61


optimum so that the Hessian matrix is nondegenerate. we can solve for the
substitution matrix D x ( w ) by taking the inverse of the Hessian matrix:




(We have multiplied through by -1 to eliminate the minus signs from both
sides of the expression.) Since the bordered Hessian is symmetric, its in-
verse is symmetric. which shows that the cross-price effects are symmetric.
It can also be shown that the substitution matrix is negative semidefinite.
Since we will present a simple proof of this below using other methods, we
will omit this demonstration here.


4.5 Algebraic approach to cost minimization

As in the case of profit maximization, we can also apply the algebraic
techniques to the problem of cost minimization. We take as our data some
observed choices by a firm of output levels yt, factor prices w t , and factor
levels x t , for t = 1,.. . , T. When will these data be consistent with the
model of cost minimization?
   An obvious necessary condition is that the cost of the observed choice of
inputs is no greater than the cost of any other level of inputs that would
produce at least as much output. Translated into symbols, this says

               w t x t 5 w t x s for all s and t such that yS   > yt
We will refer to this condition as the W e a k Axiom of C o s t Minimiza-
tion (WACM).
   As in the case of profit maximization, WACM can be used to derive the
delta version of downward-sloping demands. Take two different observa-
tions with the same output level and note that cost minimization irnplies
that
                               w t x t 5 wtxs


The first expression says that the t th observation must have the lower
production costs a t the t th prices; the second expression says that the
s t h observation must have the lower production costs a t the s t h prices.
     Write the second inequality as



add it t o the first. and rearrange the result to get
         62 COST MINIMIZATION (Ch 4)


         or
                                               A w A x 5 0.
         Roughly speaking, the vector of factor demands must move "opposite" the
         vector of factor prices.
            One can also construct inner and outer bounds to the true input require-
         ment set that generated the data. We will state the bounds here and leave
         it to the reader to check the details. The arguments are similar to those
         presented for the case of profit maximization.
            The inner bound is given by:
                       V I ( y )= convex monotonic hull of { x t : yt    > y).
         That is, the inner bound is simply the convex monotonic hull of all obser-
         vations that can produce at least y amount of output. The outer bound is
         given by:
                     v O ( ~ )= { x : w t x   > wtxt for all t such that yt L Y } .
           These constructions are analogous to the earlier constructions of YO and
         YI. A picture of VO and V I is given in Figure 4.2.


         FACTOR 2                                    FACTOR 2




                                          FACTOR 1                                FACTOR 1

Figure         Inner and outer bounds. The sets V I and V O give inner
4.2            and outer bounds to the true input requirement set.


            It is pretty obvious that V I ( y ) is contained in V ( y ) , at least as long
         as V ( y ) is convex and monotonic. It is perhaps not quite so obvious that
         V O ( y ) contains V ( y ) ,so we provide the following proof.
            Suppose, contrary to the assertion, that we have some x that is in V ( y )
         but not in V O ( y ) . Since x is not in V O ( y ) ,there must be some observation
         t such that yt 5 y and
                                             w t x < wtxt.                            (4.8)
         But since x is in V ( y ) it can produce at least yt units of output and (4.8)
         shows that it costs less than x t . This contradicts the assumption that xt
         is a cost-minimizing bundle.
Notes

The algebraic approach to cost minimization is further developed in Var-
ian (1982b).


Exercises

4.1. Prove rigorously that profit maximization implies cost minimization.

4.2. Use the Kuhn-Tucker theorem to derive conditions for cost minimiza-
tion that are valid even if the optimal solution involves a boundary solution.

4.3. A firm has two plants with cost functions cl(y1) = yf/2 and c2(y2) =
y2. What is the cost function for the firm?

4.4. A firm has two plants. One plant produces output according to the
production function X ? X ; - ~ . The other plant has a production function
X!X;-~. What is the cost function for this technology?

4.5. Suppose that the firm has two possible activities to produce output.
Activity a uses a1 units of good 1 and a2 units of good 2 to produce 1
unit of output. Activity b uses bl units of good 1 and b2 units of good
2 to produce 1 unit of output. Factors can only be used in these fixed
proportions. If the factor prices are (wl, w2), what are the demands for
the two factors? What is the cost function for this technology? For what
factor prices is the cost function not differentiable?

4.6. A firm has two plants with cost functions cl(yl) = 4 f i and cz(y2) =
2&. What is its cost of producing an output y?

4.7. The following table shows two observations on factor demand x l , x2,
factor prices, wl, wz,and output, y for a firm. Is the behavior depicted in
this table consistent with cost-minimizing behavior?




4.8. A firm has a production function y = ~ 1 x 2 .If the minimum cost of
production a t wl = wz = 1 is equal to 4, what is y equal to?
                         CHAPTER             3

                 COST
               FUNCTION

The cost function measures the minimum cost of producing a given level
of output for some fixed factor prices. As such it summarizes information
about the technological choices available to the firms. It turns out that the
behavior of the cost function can tell us a lot about the nature of the firm's
technology.
   Just as the production function is our primary means of describing the
technological possibilities of production, the cost function will be our pri-
mary means of describing the economic possibilities of a firm. In the next
two sections we will investigate the behavior of the cost function c(w, y)
with respect to its price and quantity arguments. Before undertaking that
study we need to define a few related functions, namely the average and
the marginal cost functions.


5.1 Average and marginal costs
Let us consider the structure of the cost function. In general, the cost


                                    -
function can always be expressed simply as the value of the conditional
factor demands.
                           c(w, Y) wx(w, Y)
                                            AVERAGE A N D MARGINAL COSTS    65


This just says that the minimum cost of producing y units of output is the
cost of the cheapest way to produce y.
  In the short run, some of the factors of production are fixed at predeter-
mined levels. Let xf be the vector of fixed factors, x, the vector of variable
factors, and break up w into w = (w,, wf), the vectors of prices of the
variable and the fixed factors. The short-mn conditional factor demand
functions will generally depend on x f , so we write them as xv(w,y, x f ) .
Then the short-run cost function can be written as


The term w,x,(w, y , x f ) is called short-run variable cost (SVC), and
the term wfxf is the fixed cost (FC). We can define various derived cost
concepts from these basic units:
                 short-run total cost = STC = w,x,(w, y, x f )    + wfxf
             short-run average cost = SAC = c(w, Y, ~f
                                                Y
                                            wVXV(W,Y,~ f )
   short-run average variable cost = SAVC =
                                                    Y
                                            Wf
      short-run average fixed cost = SAFC = -  Xf
                                                    Y
                                            ac(w,Y,xf)
            short-run marginal cost = SMC =
                                                ay
   When all factors are variable, the firm will optimize in the choice of x f .
Hence, the long-run cost function only depends on the factor prices and
the level of output as indicated earlier.
   We can express this long-run function in terms of the short-run cost
function in the following way. Let xf (w, y) be the optimal choice of the
fixed factors, and let x, (w, y) = xv(w,y, xf (w, y)) be the long-run optimal
choice of the variable factors. Then the long-run cost function can be
written as


The long-run cost function can be used to define cost concepts similar to
those defined above:
                                                c(w, Y)
                  long-run average cost = LAC = -
                                                  Y
                                                dc(w,
                long-run marginal cost = LMC = -.     Y)
                                                  ay
Notice that "long-run average cost" equals 'long-run average variable cost"
since all costs are variable in the long-run; "long-run fixed costs" are zero
for the same reason.
66 COST FUNCTION (Ch. 5)


  Long run and short run are of course relative concepts. Which factors
are considered variable and which are considered fixed depends on the
particular problem being analyzed. You must first consider over what time
period you wish to analyze the firm's behavior and then ask what factors
can the fhn adjust during that time period.


EXAMPLE: The short-run Cobb-Douglas cost functions

Suppose the second factor in a Cobb-Douglas technology is restricted to
operate at a level k . Then the cost-minimizing problem is

                                    min w l x l + w2k
                             such that y = ~ y k l - ~ .

Solving the constraint for xl as a function of y and k gives



Thus
                                                  a-1   1
                    c ( w l , ~ 2 , Y , k ) = ~ l ( y k) a + w 2 k .
The following variations can also be calculated:


                   short-run average cost = wl              (a)"       ! w;k

           short-run average variable cost = wl
                                             w2k
              short-run average fixed cost = -
                                                            (a)?
                                              Y
                  short-run marginal cost = -
                                            a




EXAMPLE: Constant returns to scale and the cost function

If the production function exhibits constant returns to scale, then it is
intuitively clear that the cost function should exhibit costs that are linear
in the level of output: if you want to produce twice as much output it
will cost you twice as much. This intuition is verified in the following
proposition:
                                                  THE GEOMETRY OF COSTS     67


Constant returns to scale. If the production function exhibits constant
returns to scale, the cost function may be written as c(w, y) = yc(w, 1).

Proof. Let x* be a cheapest way to produce one unit of output at prices
w so that c(w, 1) = wx*.Then I claim that c(w, y) = wyx* = yc(w, 1).
Notice first that yx* is feasible to produce y since the technology is constant
returns to scale. Suppose that it does not minimize cost; instead let x' be
the cost-minimizing bundle to produce y at prices w so that wx' < wyx*.
Then w ' l y < wx* and x'ly can produce 1 since the technology is constant
returns to scale. This contradicts the definition of x*. 1

  If the technology exhibits constant returns to scale, then the average
cost, the average variable cost, and the marginal cost functions are all the
same.


5.2 The geometry of costs
The cost function is the single most useful tool for studying the economic
behavior of a firm. In a sense to be made clear later, the cost function
summarizes all economically relevant information about the technology of
the firm. In the following sections we will examine some of the properties
of the cost function. This is most conveniently done in two stages: first, we
examine the properties of the cost function under the assumption of fixed
factor prices. In this case, we will write the cost function simply as c(y).
Second, we will examine the properties of the cost function when factor
prices are free to vary.
   Since we have taken factor prices to be fued, costs depend only on the
level of output of a firm, and useful graphs can be drawn that relate output
and costs. The total cost curve is always assumed to be monotonic in
output: the more you produce, the more it costs. The average cost curve,
however, can increase or decrease with output, depending on whether total
costs rise more than or less than linearly. It is often thought that the most
realistic case, at least in the short run, is the case where the average cost
curve first decreases and then increases. The reason for this is as follows.
   In the short run the cost function has two components: fixed costs and
variable costs. We can therefore write short-run average cost as

   S A C = ' ( ~ 787 ~ f -
                         -)-               Y. ~ f =) S A F C + SAVC.
                           WfXf + w"-Jx"J(w,
                 Y            Y             Y
  In most applications, the short-run fixed factors will be such things as
machines, buildings, and other types of capital equipment while the variable
factors will be labor and raw materials. Let us consider how the costs
attributable to these factors will change as output changes.
         68 COST FUNCTION (Ch. 5)


            As we increase output, average variable costs may initially decrease if
         there is some initial region of economies of scale. However, it seems rea-
         sonable to suppose that the variable factors required will increase mqre or
         less linearly until we approach some capacity level of output determined by
         the amounts of the fixed factors. When we are near to capacity, we need
         t o use more than a proportional amount of the variable inputs t o increase
         output. Thus, the average variable cost function should eventually increase
         as output increases, as depicted in Figure 5.1A. Average fixed costs must
         of course decrease with output, as indicated in Figure 5.1B. Adding to-
         gether the average variable cost curve and the average fixed costs gives us
         the U-shaped average cost curve in Figure 5.1C. The initial decrease in
         average costs is due to the decrease in average fixed costs; the eventual
         increase in average costs is due to the increase in average variable costs.
         The level of output a t which the average cost of production is minimized
         is sometimes known as the minimal efficient scale.
            In the long run all costs are variable costs; in such circumstances in-
         creasing average costs seems unreasonable since a firm could always repli-
         cate its production process. Hence, the reasonable long-run possibilities
         should be either constant or decreasing average costs. On the other hand,
         as we mentioned earlier, certain kinds of firms may not exhibit a long-run
         constant-returns-to-scale technology because of long-run fixed factors. If
         some factors do remain fixed even in the long run, the appropriate long-run
         average cost curve should presumably be U-shaped, for essentially the same
         reasons given in the short-run case.




Figure        Average cost curves. The average variable cost curve will
5.1           eventually rise with output, while the average fixed cost curve
              always falls with output. The interaction of these two effects
              produces a U-shaped average cost curve.


           Let us now consider the marginal cost curve. What is its relationship to
         the average cost curve? Let y* denote the point of minimum average cost;
         then to the left of 'y average costs are declining so that for y 5 y*
                                                    THE GEOMETRY OF COSTS   69


Taking the derivative gives

                                         <
                        ycl(y) - c ( ~ ) 0 for y 5 y*,
                             y2
which implies
                          cl(y)   <-
                                   C(Y>for y < y*.
                                   Y
This inequality says that marginal cost is less than average cost to the left
of the minimum average cost point. A similar analysis shows that

                          cl(y)   >-
                                   C(Y)for y 2 y*.
                                     Y
Since both inequalities must hold at y*, we have



that is, marginal costs equal average costs at the point of minimum average
costs.
   What is the relationship of the marginal cost curve to the average variable
cost curve? Simply by changing the notation in the above argument, we
can show that the marginal cost curve lies below the average variable cost
curve when the average variable cost curve is decreasing, and lies above it
when it is increasing. It follows that the marginal cost curve must pass
through the minimum point of the average variable cost curve.
   It is also not hard to show that marginal cost must equal average variable
cost for the f i s t unit of output. After all, the marginal cost of the first
unit of output is the same as the average variable cost of the first unit
of output, since both numbers are equal to ~ ( 1 -) ~ ( 0 ) .A more formal
demonstration is also possible. Average variable cost is defined by



  If y = 0, this expression becomes 010, which is indeterminate. However,
the limit of %(y)/y can be calculated using L'HGpital's rule:
                                  cv (Y) -
                              lim -      --c:(o)
                         O ' Y      y         1 '
(See Chapter 26, page 481, for a statement of this rule.) It follows that
average variable cost at zero output is just marginal cost.
  All of the analysis just discussed holds in both the long and the short
run. However, if production exhibits constant returns to scale in the long
run, so that the cost function is linear in the level of output, then average
cost, average variable cost, and marginal cost are all equal to each other,
which makes most of the relationships just described rather trivial.
70 COST FUNCTION (Ch. 5)



EXAMPLE: The Cobb-Douglas cost curves

As calculated in an earlier example, the generalized Cobb-Douglas technol-
ogy has a cost function of the form

                        c(y)=~~.+ba+bI1
where K is a function of factor prices and parameters. Thus,




    +                                                                 +
If a b < 1 , the cost curves exhibit increasing average costs; if a b = 1 ,
the cost curves exhibit constant average cost.
   We have also seen earlier that the short-run cost function for the Cobb-
Douglas technology has the form


Thus




5.3 Long-run and short-run cost curves
Let us now consider the relationship between the long-run cost curves and
the short-run cost curves. It is clear that the long-run cost curve must never
lie above any short-run cost curve, since the short-run cost minimization
problem is just a constrained version of the long-run cost minimization
problem.
   Let us write the long-run cost function as c(y) = c(y, z(y)). Here we have
omitted the factor prices since they are assumed fixed, and we let z(y) be
the cost-minimizing demand for a single fixed factor. Let y* be some given
level of output, and let z* = z(y*) be the associated long-run demand for
the fwed factor. The short-run cost, c(y, z*), must be at least as great
as the long-run cost, c(y, ~ ( y ) ) ,for all levels of output, and the short-run
cost will equal the long-run cost at output y*, so c(y*, z*) = c(y*,~ ( y * ) ) .
Hence, the long- and the short-run cost curves must be tangent at y*.
   This is just a geometric restatement of the envelope theorem. The slope
of the long-run cost curve at y* is
                                       FACTOR PRICES AND COST FUNCTIONS      71


But since z* is the optimal choice of the fixed factors at the output level
u*. we must have


Thus, long-run marginal costs at y* equal short-run marginal costs at
(Y*,z*).
  Finally, we note that if the long- and short-run cost curves are tangent,
the long- and short-run average cost curves must also be tangent. A typical
configuration is illustrated in Figure 5.2.




                                  OUTPUT
             Y'

     Long-run and short-run average cost curves. Note that                         Figure
     the long-run and the short-run average cost curves must be tan-               5.2
     gent which implies that the long-run and short-run marginal
     costs must be equal.


  Another way to see the relationship between the long-run and the short-
run average cost curves is to start with the family of short-run average cost
curves. Suppose, for example, that we have a fixed factor that can be used
only at three discrete levels: Z I , Z ~ ,23. We depict this family of curves in
Figure 5.3. What would be the long-run cost curve? It is simply the lower
envelope of these short-run curves since the optimal choice of z to produce
output y will simply be the choice that has the minimum cost of producing
y. This envelope operation generates a scalloped-shaped long-run average
cost curve. If there are many possible values of the fixed factor, these
scallops become a smooth curve.


5.4 Factor prices and cost functions
We turn now to the study of the price behavior of cost functions. Several
interesting properties follow directly from the definition of the functions.
These are summarized in the following remarks. Note the close analogy
with the properties of the profit function.
         72 COST FUNCTION (Ch. 5)




Figure        Long-run average cost curve. The long-run average cost
5.3           curve, LAC, is the lower envelope of the short-run average cost
              curves, SAC1, SAC2, and SAC3.

         Properties of the cost function.

         1) Nondecreasing zn w. If w' L w , then c(wl,y ) 2 c(w,Y ) .

         2) Homogeneous of degree 1 in w. c(tw,y ) = tc(w,y ) fort > 0.

         3) Concave in w. c(tw + ( 1 - t)wl,y ) 2 tc(w,y ) + ( 1 - t)c(wl,y ) for
         O<tll.

         4 ) Continuous in w. c(w,y ) is continuous as a function of w, for w >> 0.
         Pro0f,
         1 ) This is obvious, but a formal proof may be instructive. Let x and x'
         be cost-minimizing bundles associated with w and w'. Then wx 5 wx'
         by minimization and wx' < w'x' since w 5 w'. Putting these inequalities
         together gives wx < w'x' as required.

         2) We show that if x is the cost-minimizing bundle at prices w , then x
         also minimizes costs at prices tw. Suppose not, and let x' be a cost-
         minimizing bundle at tw so that twx' < twx. But this inequality implies
         wx' < wx, which contradicts the definition of x. Hence, multiplying factor
         prices by a positive scalar t does not change the composition of a cost-
         minimizing bundle, and, thus, costs must rise by exactly a factor of t:
         c(tw,y ) = twx = tc(w,y).

         3) Let ( w ,x ) and (w',x') be two cost-minimizing price-factor combinations
                                         FACTOR PRICES AND COST FUNCTIONS     73

and let w" = t w   + (1- t)wl for any 0 5 t 5 1. Now,

Since x" is not necessarily the cheapest way to produce y at prices w' or
W , we have wx" 2 c(w, Y) and w' . x" 2 c(wt, y). Thus,




4) The continuity of c follows from the Theorem of the Maximum, in C h a p
ter 27, page 506. 1

   The only property that is surprising here is the concavity. However, we
can provide intuition for this property similar to the one presented for the
profit function. Suppose we graph cost as a function of the price of a single
input, with all other prices held constant. If the price of a factor rises, costs
will never go down (property I), but they will go up a t a decreasing rate
(property 3). Why? Because as this one factor becomes more expensive
and other prices stay the same, the cost-minimizing firm will shift away
from it to use other inputs.
   This is made more clear by considering Figure 5.4. Let x* be a cost-
minimizing bundle a t prices w*. Suppose the price of factor 1 changes
from w; to wl. If we just behave passively and continue to use x*, our
costs will be C = wlx; CrZ2+        w:x:. The minimal cost of production
c(w, y) must be less than this "passive" cost function; thus, the graph of
c(w, y) must lie below the graph of the passive cost function, with both
curves coinciding at m;. It is not hard to see that this implies c(w, y) is
concave with respect to wl.


  COST                                     n
                                c = w, x ; +,-
                                            x w:x:
                                              2




     Concavity of the cost function. The cost function will be                      Figure
     a concave function of the factor price since it must always lie                5.4
     below the "passive" cost function.
74 COST FUNCTION (Ch. 5)


  The same'graph can be used to discover a very useful way to find an
expression for the conditional factor demand. We first state the result
formally:

Shephard's lemma.           (The derivative property.) Let xi(w, y) be the
firm's conditional factor demand for input i. Then if the cost function is
differentiable at (w, y), and wi > 0 for i = 1,. . . , n then




Proof. The proof is very similar to the proof of Hotelling's lemma. Let x*
be a cost-minimizing bundle that produces y at prices w*. Then define the
function
                         g(w) = c(w, y) - wx*.
Since c(w, y) is the cheapest way to produce y, this function is always
nonpositive. At w = w*, g(w*) = 0. Since this is a maximum value of
g(w), its derivative must vanish:




Hence, the cost-minimizinginput vector is just given by the vector of deriva-
tives of the cost function with respect to the prices. I

   Since this proposition is important, we will suggest four different ways
of proving it. First, the cost function is by definition equal to c(w, y) E
wx(w, y). Differentiating this expression with respect to wi and using the
first-order conditions give us the result. (Hint: x(w, y) also satisfies the
identity f ( ~ ( w , ' ~r) )y. You will need to differentiate this with respect to
wi.1
   Second, the above calculations are really just repeating the derivation of
the envelope theorem described in the next section. This theorem can be
applied directly to give the desired result.
   Third, there is a nice geometrical argument that uses the same Figure
5.4 we used in arguing for concavity of the cost function. Recall in Figure
5.4 that the line c = wlxi    + xy=2      wfxa lay above c = c(w, y) and both
curves coincided at wl = w?. Thus, the curves must be tangent, so that
X; = ~ c ( w * ,
              y)lawl.
   Finally, we consider the basic economic intuition behind the proposition.
If we are operating at a cost-minimizing point and the price wl increases,
there will be a direct effect, in that the expenditure on the first factor
will increase. There will also be an indirect effect, in that we will want to
change the factor mix. But since we are operating at a cost-minimizing
point, any such infinitesimal change must yield zero additional profits.
                  THE ENVELOPE THEOREM FOR CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION      75



5.5 The envelope theorem for constrained optimization
Shephard's lemma is another example of the envelope theorem. However,
in this case we must apply a version of the envelope theorem that is ap-
propriate for constrained maximization problems. The proof for this case
is given in Chapter 27, page 501.
   Consider a general parameterized constrained maximization problem of
the form
                       M(a) = max g(z1,22, a)
                               5 1 rX2

                           such that h(z1, x2, a ) = 0.
                                                    +
In the case of the cost function g(xl, 22, a) = ~ 1 x 1 202x2, h(x1,x2, a) =
f (x1,x2) - y, and a could be one of the prices.
   The Lagrangian for this problem is

and the first-order conditions are




                               -
These conditions determine the optimal choice functions (XI(a), xs(a)),
which in turn determine the maximum value function
                         M(a) g(xl(a),xz(a), a).                      (5.2)
   The envelope theorem gives us a formula for the derivative of the value
function with respect to a parameter in the maximization problem. Specif-
ically, the formula is




As before, the interpretation of the partial derivatives needs special care:
they are the derivatives of g and h with respect to a holdzng xl and x2
fied at thew optzmal values. The proof of the envelope theorem is given
in Chapter 27, page 501. Here we simply apply it to the cost minimization
problem.
   In this problem the parameter a can be chosen to be one of the factor
prices, w,. The optimal value function M(a) is the cost function c(w, y).
The envelope theorem asserts that


which is simply Shephard's lemma.
76 COST FUNCTION (Ch. 5)



EXAMPLE: Marginal cost revisited

As another application of the envelope theorem, consider the derivative of
the cost function with respect to y. According to the envelope theorem,
this is given by the derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to y. The
Lagrangian for the cost minimization problem is



Hence


In other words, the Lagrange multiplier in the cost minimization problem
is simply marginal cost.


5.6 Comparative statics using the cost function
We have shown earlier that cost functions have certain properties that fol-
low from the structure of the cost minimization problem; we have shown
above that the conditional factor demand functions are simply the deriva-
tives of the cost functions. Hence, the properties we have found concerning
the cost function will translate into certain restrictions on its derivatives,
the factor demand functions. These restrictions will be the same sort of
restrictions we found earlier using other methods, but their development
using the cost function is quite nice.
   Let us go through these restrictions one by one.

  1 ) The cost function is nondecreasing in factor prices. It follows from
  this that ~ c ( w ,                 >
                   y)/awi = x ~ ( wy,) 0.

  2) The cost function is homogeneous of degree 1 in w. Therefore, the
  derivatives of the cost function, the factor demands, are homogeneous of
  degree 0 in w. (See Chapter 26, page 482).

  3) The cost function is concave i n w. Therefore, the matrix of second
  derivatives of the cost function-the matrix of first derivatives of the
  factor demand functions-is a symmetric negative semidefinite matrix.
  This is not an obvious outcome of cost-minimizing behavior. It has
  several implications.

    a ) The cross-price effects are symmetric. That is,
                                                                  Exercises   77

     b) The own-price effects are nonpositive. Roughly speaking, the condi-
     tional factor demand curves are downward sloping. This follows since
     dxi(w, y)/aw, = a2c(w,y)/aw? I 0 where the last inequality comes
     from the fact that the diagonal terms of a negative semidefinite matrix
     must be nonpositive.

     c) The vector of changes in factor demands moves "opposite" the vector
                                                   <
     of changes in factor prices. That is, d w d x 0.

   Note that since the concavity of the cost function followed solely from
the hypothesis of cost minimization, the symmetry and negative semidefi-
niteness of the first derivative matrix of the factor demand functions follow
solely from the hypothesis of cost minimization and do not involve any
restrictions on the structure of the technology.


Notes

The properties of the cost function were developed by several authors, but
the most systematic treatment is in Shephard (1953) and Shephard (1970).
A comprehensive survey is available in Diewert (1974). The treatment here
owes much to McFadden (1978).


Exercises


5.1. A firm has two plants. One plant produces according to a cost function
cl (91) = Yf.The other plant produces according to a cost function c2(y2)=
Yg. The factor prices are fixed and so are omitted from the discussion.
What is the cost function for the firm?

5.2. A firm has two plants with cost functions cl(y1) = 3yf and cn(y2) = yg.
What is the cost function for the firm?

5.3. A firm has a production function given by f (xl, 2 2 , x3, 24) = min{2xl+
      +
x2,x3 2 ~ ~ )   What
                   . is the cost function for this technology? What is the
conditional demand function for factors 1 and 2 as a function of factor
prices (wl, w2, w3, w4) and output y?

5.4. A firm has a production function given by f(xl,x2) = min(2x1             +
      +
x2,xl 2x2). What is the cost function for this technology? What is
the conditional demand function for factors 1 and 2 as a function of factor
prices (wl, w2) and output y?
    78 COST FUNCTION (Ch. 5)


    5.5. A firm has a production function of the form f (xl, x2) = max{zl, 2 2 ) .
*
    Does this firm have a convex or a nonconvex input requirement set? What
    is the conditional factor demand function for factor l? What is its cost
    function?

    5.6. Consider a firm with conditional factor demand functions of the form




    Output has been set equal to 1 for convenience. What are the values of the
    parameters a, b, and c and why?

    5.7. A firm has a production function y = 21x2. If the minimum cost of
    production at wl = w2 = 1 is equal to 4, what is y equal to?

    5.8. A firm has a cost function



    Let p be the price of output, and let the factor prices be fixed. If p = 2
    how much will the firm produce? If p = 1 how much will the firm produce?
    What is the profit function of this firm? (Hint: be careful!)

    5.9. A typical Silicon Valley firm produces output of chips y using a cost
    function c(y), which exhibits increasing marginal costs. Of the chips it
    produces, a fraction 1 - a are defective and cannot be sold. Working chips
    can be sold at a price p and the chip market is highly competitive.

      (a) Calculate the derivative of profits with respect to a and its sign.

      (b) Calculate the derivative of output with respect to a and its sign.

      (c) Suppose that there are n identical chip producers, let D(p) be the
    demand function, and let p(a) be the competitive equilibrium price. Cal-
    culate (dplda) and its sign.

    5.10. Suppose that a firm behaves competitively in its output market and
    its factor market. Suppose the price of each input increases, and let dwi
    be the increase in factor price i. Under what conditions will the profit
    maximizing output decrease?

    5.11. A firm uses 4 inputs to produce 1 output. The production function
    is ~ ( x I , x ~ , x ~
                         =, x ~ )
                           min{x1,x2) +min{x3,x4).
       (a) What is the vector of conditional factor demands to produce 1 unit
    of output when the factor price vector is w = (1,2,3,4)?
                                                                Exercises   79


  (b) What is the cost function?

  (c) What kind of returns to scale does this technology exhibit?

  (d) Another firm has a production function f (xl, ~ 2 ~ 2 3 ~=
                                                               x4)
                                                                 min{xl     +
22,$3 + 24). What is the vector of conditional factor demands to produce
1 unit of output when prices are w = (1,2,3,4)?

  (e)   What is the cost function for this fkm?

  (f) What kind of returns to scale does this technology represent?
5.12. A factor of production i is called znferior if the conditional demand
for that factor decreases as output increases; that is, ax, (w, y)/dy < 0.

  (a) Draw a diagram indicating that inferior factors are possible.

  (b) Show that if the technology is constant returns to scale, then no
factors can be inferior.

   (c) Show that if marginal cost decreases as the price of some factor
increases, then that factor must be inferior.

5.13. Consider a profit-maximizing firm that produces a good which is
sold in a competitive market. It is observed that when the price of the
output good rises, the firm hires more skilled workers but fewer unskilled
workers. Now the unskilled workers unionize and succeed in getting their
wage increased. Assume that all other prices remain constant.

  (a) What will happen to the firm's demand for unskilled workers?

  (b) What will happen to the firm's supply of output?

5.14. You have a time series of observations on changes in output, Ay,
changes in cost, Ac, changes in factor prices, Aw,, and the levels of factor
demands, x, for i = 1 . .. n. How would you construct an estimate of
marginal cost, &(w, y)/dy, in each period?

5.15. Compute the cost function for the technology




5.16. For each cost function determine if it is homogeneous of degree one,
monotonic, concave, and/or continuous. If it is, derive the associated pro-
duction function.

  (a) c(w,y) = y 1 / 2 ( ~ 1 ~ 2 ) 3 / 4
80 COST FUNCTION (Ch. 5)




5.17. A firm has an input requirement set given by V(y) = {x   > 0:ax1 t
bx2   > Y2).
  (a) What is the production function?

  (b) What are the conditional factor demands?

  (c) What is the cost function?
                         CHAPTER            6

                   DUALITY


In the last chapter we investigated the properties of the cost function,
the function that measures the minimum cost of achieving a desired level
of production. Given any technology, it is straightforward, at least in
principle, to derive its cost function: we simply solve the cost minimization
problem.
  In this chapter we show that this process can be reversed. Given a cost
function we can %olve for" a technology that could have generated that cost
function. This means that the cost function contains essentially the same
information that the production function contains. Any concept defined in
terms of the properties of the production function has a "dual" definition
in terms of the properties of the cost function and vice versa. This general
observation is known as the principle of duality. It has several important
consequences that we will investigate in this chapter.
  The duality between seemingly different ways of representing economic
behavior is useful in the study of consumer theory, welfare economics, and
many other areas in economics. Many relationships that are difficult to
understand when looked at directly become simple, or even trivial, when
looked at using the tools of duality.
         82 DUALITY (Ch 6 )



         6.1 Duality

         In Chapter 4 we described a set VO(y) which we argued was an "outer
         bound" to the true input requirement set V(y). Given data (w t , xt, y t ),
         VO(y) is defined to be

                     VO(y) = {x : w t x    > wtxt for all t such that yt 5 y).
         It is straightforward to verify that VO(y) is a closed, monotonic, and convex
         technology. Furthermore, as we observed in Chapter 4, it contains any
         technology that could have generated the data (w t , x t , y t ) for t = 1, - .. , T .
            If we observe choices for many different factor prices, it seems that VO(y)
         should "approach" the true input requirement set in some sense. To make
         this precise, let the factor prices vary over all possible price vectors w 0.   >
         Then the natural generalization of VO becomes

                    V*(Y)= {x : w x     > wx(w, y) = c(w, y) for all w > 0)
           What is the relationship between V*(y) and the true input requirement
         set V(y)? Of course, V*(y) will contain V(y), as we showed in Chapter 4,
         page 62. In general, V*(y) will strictly contain V(y). For example, in
         Figure 6.1A we see that the shaded area cannot be ruled out of V*(y) since
                                                                      >
         the points in this area satisfy the condition that w x c(w, y).


         FACTOR 2                                  FACTOR 2




                                        FACTOR 1                                        FACTOR 1




Figure         Relationship between V(y) a n d V*(y). In general V*(y)
6.1            will strictly contain V(y).


            The same is true for Figure 6 1B. The cost function can only contain
         information about the economzcally relevant sections of V(y), namely, those
                                                              DUALITY    83

factor bundles that could actually be the solution to a cost minimization
problem, i.e., that could actually be conditional factor demands.
  However, suppose that our original technology is convex and monotonic.
In this case V*(y) will equal V(y). This is because, in the convex, mono-
tonic case, each point on the boundary of V(y) is a cost-minimizing factor
demand for some price vector w 2 0 . Thus, the set of points where
w x L c(w, y) for all w 2 0 will precisely describe the input requirement
set. More formally:

When V(y) equals V*(y). Suppose V(y) is a regular, convex, monotonic
technology. Then V*(y) = V(y).

Proof. (Sketch) We already know that V*(y) contains V(y), so we only
have t o show that if x is in V*(y) then x must be in V(y). Suppose
that x is not an element of V(y). Then since V(y) is a closed convex
set satisfying the monotonicity hypothesis, we can apply a version of the
separating hyperplane theorem (see Chapter 26, page 483) to find a vector
w*  >   0 such that w*x < w*z for all z in V(y). Let z* be a point in
V(y) that mizlimizes cost at the prices w*. Then in particular we have
W*X < W*Z* = c(w*,y). But then x cannot be in V*(y), according t o the
definition of V*(y). I

   This proposition shows that if the original technology is convex and
monotonic, then the cost function associated with the technology can be
used t o completely reconstruct the original technology. If we know the
minimal cost of operation for every possible price vector w , then we know
the entire set of technological choices open to the firm.
   This is a reasonably satisfactory result in the case of convex and mono-
tonic technologies, but what about less well-behaved cases? Suppose we
start with some technology V(y), possibly nonconvex. We find its cost
function c(w, y) and then generate V*(y). We know from the above re-
sults that V*(y) will not necessarily be equal to V(y), unless V(y) happens
t o have the convexity and monotonicity properties. However, suppose we
define
                          C* (w, y) = min w x

                          such that x is in V*(y).
What is the relationship between c*(w,y) and c(w, y)?

When c(w, y) equals c*(w,y).         It follows from the definition of the
functions that c*(w, y) = c(w, y).

Proof. It is easy to see that c*(w, y) 5 c(w, y); since V*(y) always con-
tains V(y), the minimal cost bundle in V*(y) must be a t least as small
as the minimal cost bundle in V(y). Suppose that for some prices w',
84 DUALITY (Ch. 6 )


the cost-minimizing bundle x' in V*(y) has the property that w'x' =
c*(wl,y) < c(wl, y). But this can't happen, since by definition of V*(y),
w'x' 2 c(wl, y). I

  This proposition shows that the cost function for the technology V(y) is
the same as the cost function for its convexification V*(y). In this sense,
the assumption of convex input requirement sets is not very restrictive from
an economic point of view.
  Let us summarize the discussion to date:

  (1) Given a cost function we can define an input requirement set V*(y).

  (2) If the original technology is convex and monotonic, the constructed
  technology will be identical with the original technology.

  (3) If the original technology is nonconvex or nonmonotonic, the con-
  structed input requirement will be a convexified, monotonized version of
  the original set, and, most importantly, the constructed technology will
  have the same cost function as the original technology.

   We can summarize the above three points succinctly with the fundamen-
tal principle of duality in production: the cost function of a firm summa-
rizes all of the economically relevant aspects of its technology.


6.2 Sufficient conditions for cost functions

We have seen in the last section that the cost function summarizes all of the
economically relevant information about a technology. We have seen in the
previous chapter that all cost functions are nondecreasing, homogeneous,
concave, continuous functions of prices. The question arises: suppose that
you are given a nondecreasing, homogeneous, concave, continuous function
of prices-is it necessarily the cost function of some technology?
   Another way to phrase this question is: are the properties described in
the last chapter a complete list of the implications of cost-minimizing be-
havior? Given a function that has those properties, must it necessarily arise
from some technology? The answer is yes, and the following proposition
shows how to construct such a technology.

When +(w, Y) is a cost function. Let 4(w, Y) be a differentiablefunc-
tion satisfying

  1) 4(tw, y) = t4(w7y) for all t 2 0;

  2) 4(w,y) 2 0 f o r w > O a n d y 2 0 ;
                                 SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR COST FUNCTIONS      85




  4) 4(w, y) is concave in w
   Then 4(w, y) is the cost function for the technology defined by V*(y) =
              >
{ x > 0 : w x +(w,y), for all w 0).   >
Proof. Given a w 2 0 we define




and note that since 4(w, y) is homogeneous of degree 1 in w, Euler's law
implies that $(w, y) can be written as




(For Euler's law, see Chapter 26, page 481.) Note that the monotonicity
                             >
of +(w, y) implies x ( w , y) 0.
   What we need to show is that for any given w' 2 0, x(wl, y) actually
minimizes w'x over all x in V*(y):
              4(w1,y) = w1x(w', y) 5 w l x for all x in V*(y).

First, we show that x ( w l ,y) is feasible; that is, x(wl, y) is in V*(y). By the
concavity of 4(w, y) in w we have



          >
for all w 0. (See Chapter 27, page 496.)
   Using Euler's law as above. this reduces t o
                      4(w1,y) 5 wlx(w, y) for all w 2 0.

It follows from the definition of V*(y), that x ( w l ,y) is in V*(y).
   Next we show that x(w, y) actually minimizes w x over all x in V*(y).
If x is in V*(y), then by definition it must satisfy



But by Euler's law,
                             4(w, Y) = wx(w1 Y).
The above two expressions imply



for all x in V*(y) as required. I
86 DUALITY (Ch. 61



6.3 Demand functions
The proposition proved in the last section raises an interesting question.
Suppose you are given a set of functions (gi(w, y ) ) that satisfy the prop
erties of conditional factor demand functions described in the last chapter,
namely, that they are homogeneous of degree 0 in prices and that




is a symmetric negative semidefinite matrix. Are these functions necessarily
factor demand functions for some technology?
   Let us try to apply the above proposition. First, we construct a candidate
for a cost function:
                                     n




   Next, we check whether it satisfies the properties required for the propo-
sition just proved.

  1 ) Is +(w, y ) homogeneous of degree 1 in w? To check this we look at
  +(tw, y ) = xi   twigi(tw, y ) . Since the functions gi(w, y ) are by assump
  tion homogeneous of degree 0, gi (tw, y ) = gi (w, y) SO that




  2 ) Is +(w, y ) 2 0 for w 2 O? Since gi(w, y ) 2 0, the answer is clearly
  Yes.

  3) Is $(w,y) nondecreasing in wi? Using the product rule, we compute




  Since g,(w, y ) is homogeneous of degree 0, the last term vanishes and
  gi(w, y ) is clearly greater than or equal to 0.

  4) Finally is 4(w, y ) concave in w? To check this we differentiate +(w, y)
  twice to get
                                                     DEMAND FUNCTIONS      87


  For concavity we want these matrices to be symmetric and negative
  semidefinite, which they are by hypothesis.

  Hence, the proposition proved in this section applies and there is a tech-
nology V*(y) that yields (g,(w, y)) as its conditional factor demands. This
means that the properties of homogeneity and negative semidefiniteness
form a complete list of the restrictions on demand functions imposed by
the model of cost-minimizing behavior.
  Of course, essentially the same results hold for profit functions and (un-
conditional) demand and supply functions. If the profit function obeys the
restrictions described in Chapter 3, page 40, or, equivalently, if the demand
and supply functions obey the restrictions in Chapter 3, page 46, then there
must exist a technology that generates this profit function or these demand
and supply functions.


EXAMPLE: Applying the duality mapping

Suppose we are given a specific cost function c(w, y ) = ywywl-a. How
can we solve for its associated technology? According to the derivative
property




We want to eliminate w2/w1 from these two equations and get an equation
for y in terms of xl and x2. Rearranging each equation gives




Setting these equal to each other and raising both sides to the - a ( l - a )
power,




This is just the Cobb-Douglas technology.
88 DUALITY (Ch. 6)



EXAMPLE: Constant returns to scale and the cost function

Since the cost function tells us all of the economically relevant information
about the technology, we can try to interpret various restrictions on costs in
terms of restrictions on technology. In Chapter 5, page 66, we showed that
if the technology exhibited constant returns to scale, then the cost function
would have the form c(w)y. Here we show that the reverse implication is
also true.

C o n s t a n t r e t u r n s t o scale. Let V(y) be convex and monotonic; then
if c(w, y) can be written as yc(w), V(y) must exhibit constant returns to
scale.

Proof. Using convexity, monotonicity, and the assumed form of the cost
function assumptions, we know that

            V(y) = V*(y) = {x : w . x > yc(w) for all w 2 0).

We want to show that, if x is in V*(y), then t x is in V*(ty). If x is in
V*(y), we know that w x 2 yc(w) for all w > 0. Multiplying both sides of
this equation by t we get: w t x 2 tyc(w) for all w 2 0. But this says t x is
in V*(ty). I




EXAMPLE: Elasticity of scale and the cost function

Given a production function f (x) we can consider the local measure of
returns to scale known as the elasticity of scale:




which was defined in Chapter 1, page 16. The technology exhibits locally
decreasing, constant, or increasing returns to scale as e(x) is less than,
equal to, or greater than one.
  Given some vector of factor prices we can compute the cost function of
the firm c(w, y). Let x* be the cost-minimizing bundle at (w, y). Then we
can calculate e(x*) by the following formula:
                                                  GEOMETRY OF DUALITY    89


  To see this, we perform the differentiation indicated in the definition of
e(x):




Since x* minimizes costs it satisfies the first-order conditions that wi =
A%)-.     Furthermore, by the envelope theorem, X = ac(w, y)/ay. (See
      2 2
Chapter 5, page 76.) Thus,




6.4 Geometry of duality

In this section we will examine geometrically the relationship between a
firm's technology as summarized by its production function and its eco-
nomic behavior as summarized by its cost function.
   In Figure 6.2 we have illustrated the isoquant of a firm and an isocost
curve for the same level of output y. The slope at a point (w;, w;) on this
isocost curve is given by




 PRICE 2                       FICTOR 2




                           PRICE I                         FACTOR 1




       Curvature of isoquant and isocost curves. The more                      Figure
       curved the isoquant, the less curved the isocost curve.                 6.2
90 DUALITY (Ch. 6)


On the other hand, an isoquant is defined by:



The slope of an isoquant at a point x* is given by




Now if (x;, x;) is a cost-minimizing point at prices (w:, w;), we know it
satisfies the first-order condition




Notice the nice duality: the slope of the isoquant curve gives the ratio of
the factor prices while the slope of the isocost curve gives the ratio of the
factor levels.
   What about the curvature of the isoquant and the isocost curves? It
turns out that their curvatures are inversely related: if the isocost curve is
very curved, the isoquant will be rather flat and vice versa. We can see this
by considering some specific (wl, wz) on the isocost curve and then moving
to some (wi, wb) on the isocost curve that is fairly far away. Suppose we
find that the slope of the isocost curve doesn't change very much-i.e., the
isocost curve has little curvature. Since the slope of the isocost curve gives
us the ratio of factor demands, this means that the cost-minimizing bundles
must be rather similar. Referring to Figure 6.2 we see that this means that
the isoquant must be rather sharply curved. In the extreme case we find
that the cost function of the Leontief technology is a linear function and
that an L-shaped cost function corresponds to a linear technology.


EXAMPLE: Production functions, cost functions, and conditional fac-
          tor demands

Suppose we have a nice smooth convex isoquant. Then the isocost curve is
also convex and smooth and the conditional factor demand curves are well
behaved as in Figure 6.3.
   Suppose that the isoquant has a flat spot, so that at some combination
of factor prices there is no unique bundle of factor demands. Then the
isocost curve must be nondifferentiable at this level of factor prices, and
the conditional factor demand functions are multivalued as in Figure 6.4.
                                                    THE USES OF DUALITY   91




     Technology, costs, and demand. Case of smooth, convex                      Figure
     isoquant.                                                                  6.3




     \  lsoquant

            slope= -w;,w;




     Technology, costs, and demand. Case of isoquant with flat                  Figure
     spot. There is a kink a t the isocost curve at the prices equal            6.4
     to the slope of the flat spot. At these factor prices, there are
     several cost-minimizing bundles.

  Suppose that the isoquant has a kink at some point. Then for some range
of prices, a h e d bundle of inputs will be demanded. This means that the
isocost curve must have a flat spot as depicted in Figure 6.5.
   Suppose the isoquant is nonconvex over some range. Then the isocost
curve has a kink a t some point and the conditional factor demands are
discontinuous and multivalued as depicted in Figure 6.6. Notice how the
cost function for this technology is indistinguishable from the cost function
for the convexification of this technology by comparing Figures 6.4 and 6.6.
          ( I *    X




6.5 The uses of duality
The fact that there is a dual relationship between the description of a tech-
nology and its associated cost function has several important consequences
for production economics. We have touched on some of these briefly in
passing, but it is worthwhile to summarize them here.
   First, having two different ways to describe technological properties is
very convenient theoretically since some sorts of arguments are much easier
         92 DUALITY (Ch. 6 )




Figure         Technology, costs, and demand. Case of kinked isoquant.
6.5            There is a flat spot in the isocost curve and several prices at
               which the same bundle will minimize costs.




Figure         Technology, costs, and demand. Case of nonconvex is*
6.6            quant. The isocost curve looks just the same as if there were a
               flat spot, but the factor demand function is now discontinuous.

         to demonstrate by using a cost function or profit function than by using
         a direct representation of technology. For example, consider the example
         given earlier that expected profits would be higher with a fluctuating price
         than with a price stabilized at the expected value. This is a trivial conse-
         quence of the convexity of the profit function; the argument is substantially
         less trivial if we approach this situation using a direct representation of the
         technology.
            Second, dual representations of behavior such as the cost function and
         the profit function are very useful in equilibrium analysis since they sub-
         sume the behavioral assumptions in the functional specification. If we want
         to examine the way in which a particular tax policy affects firm profits, for
         example, we can investigate how the taxes affect the prices the firm faces
         and then see how those particular changes in prices affect the profit func-
         tion. We don't have to solve any maximization problems-they are already
                                                                  Exercises   93


"solved" in the specification of the profit function.
   Third, the fact that the homogeneity, monotonicity and curvature prop-
erties exhaust the properties of the cost and profit functions makes it much
simpler to verify certain sorts of propositions about firm behavior. We can
simply ask whether the particular property in question is a consequence
of the homogeneity, monotonicity, or curvature of the cost or profit func-
tion. If it is not, then the property does not follow simply from maximizing
behavior.
   Fourth, the fact that the profit and cost functions can be characterized by
three relatively simple mathematical conditions is of great help in generat-
ing parametric forms for representing technologies. In order t o completely
specify a technology, for example, all that is necessary to do is to specify
a continuous homogeneous, monotonic, concave function of factor prices.
This may be much more convenient than specifying a production function
representation of a technology. Such parametric representations may be of
considerable help in calculating examples or in econometric work.
   Fifth, dual representations usually turn out to be more satisfactory for
econometric work. The reason is that the variables that enter into the dual
specification-the price variables-are generally thought to be exogenous
variables with respect to the choice problem of the firm. If factor markets
are competitive, then the firm is supposed to take factor prices as given and
choose levels of inputs, so that the factor prices may not be correlated with
the error terms in the statistical production relationship. This property is
very desirable from a statistical point of view. We will investigate further
in Chapter 12.

Notes

The basic duality between cost and production functions was first shown
rigorously by Shephard (1953). See Diewert (1974) for the historical devel-
opment of this topic and a general modern treatment.


Exercises

6.1. The cost function is c(wl, wz, y) = min{wl, wzIy. What is the produc-
tion function? What are the conditional factor demands?

6.2. The cost function is c(wl, W Z , y) = y[wl +w2]. What are the conditional
factor demands? What is the production function?

                                                 What do we know about a
6.3. The cost function is c(wl, w2, y) = w ~ w ; ~ .
and b?
                       CHAPTER             7
        UTILITY
     MAXIMIZATION

In this chapter we begin our examination of consumer behavior. In the
theory of a competitive firm, the supply and demand functions were de-
rived from a model of profit-maximizing behavior and a specification of
the underlying technological constraints. In the theory of the consumer we
will derive demand functions by considering a model of utility-maximizing
behavior coupled with a description of underlying economic constraints.


7.1 Consumer preferences
We consider a consumer faced with possible consumption bundles in some
set X , his consumption set. In this book we usually assume that X is
the nonnegative orthant in R k , but more specific consumption sets may
be used. For example, we might only include bundles that would give the
consumer at least a subsistence existence. We will always assume that X
is a closed and convex set.
   The consumer is assumed to have preferences on the consumption bun-
dles in X . When we write x k y, we mean "the consumer thinks that the
bundle x is at least as good as the bundle y." We want the preferences to
order the set of bundles. Therefore, we need to assume that they satisfy
certain standard properties.
                                                      C O N S U M E R PREFERENCES   95


COMPLETE. For all x and y zn X , ezther x k y or y 2 x or both.

REFLEXIVE. For all x zn X , x k x .

TRANSITIVE.            For all x, y , and z zn X, zf x >- y and y k z, then
x ? 2.

  The first assumption just says that any two bundles can be compared, the
second is trivial, and the third is necessary for any discussion of preference
maxzmzzatzon; if preferences were not transitive, there might be sets of
bundles which had no best elements.
  Given an ordering t describing "weak preference," we can define an
ordering + of strict preference simply by defining x >- y t o mean not

                                   -
y k x . We read x >- y as "x is strictly preferred to y." Similarly, we define
a notion of indifference by x y if and only if x t y and y t x .
  We often wish to make other assumptions on consumers' preferences; for
example.

CONTINUITY.           For all y zn X , the sets { x : x ? y ) and { x : x 5 y )
are closed sets. It follows that { x : x >- y ) and { x : x 4 y ) are open sets.

    This assumption is necessary to rule out certain discontinuous behavior;
it says that if (x') is a sequence of consumption bundles that are all at
least as good as a bundle y , and if this sequence converges to some bundle
x', then x* is a t least as good as y.
    The most important consequence of continuity is this: if y is strictly
preferred to z and if x is a bundle that is close enough to y, then x must
be strictly preferred to z. This is just a restatement of the assumption that
the set of strictly preferred bundles is an open set. For a brief discussion
of open and closed sets, see Chapter 26, page 478.
    In economic analysis it is often convenient to summarize a consumer's
behavior by means of a utility function; that is, a function u : X -+ R
such that x + y if and only if u ( x ) > u ( y ) . It can be shown that if
the preference ordering is complete, reflexive, transitive, and continuous,
then it can be represented by a continuous utility function. We will prove
a weaker version of this assertion below. A utility function is often a
very convenient way to describe preferences, but it should not be given
any psychological interpretation. The only relevant feature of a utility
function is its ordinal character. If u ( x ) represents some preferences and
 f : R -+ R is a monotonic function, then f ( u ( x ) )will represent exactly the
same preferences since f ( u ( x ) )2 f ( u ( y ) )if and only if U ( X ) 2 u ( y ) .
    There are other assumptions on preferences that are often useful; for
example:
% UTILITY MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 7)

WEAK MONOTONICITY. If x > y then x                        y.

STRONG MONOTONICITY. If x > y and x # y, then x > y.

  Weak monotonicity says that "at least as much of everything is at least
as good." If the consumer can costlessly dispose of unwanted goods, this
assumption is trivial. Strong monotonicity says that at least as much of
every good, and strictly more of some good, is strictly better. This is
simply assuming that goods are good.
  If one of the goods is a "bad," like garbage, or pollution, then strong
monotonicity will not be satisfied. But in these cases, redefining the good
to be the absence of garbage, or the absence of pollution, will often result in
preferences over the re-defined good that satisfies the strong monotonicity
postulate.
  Another assumption that is weaker than either kind of monotonicity is
the following:

LOCAL NONSATIATION. Given any x in X and any E > 0, then
there is some bundle y in X with Jx- y J< c such that y + x.'

   Local nonsatiation says that one can always do a little bit better, even
if one is restricted to only small changes in the consumption bundle. You
should verify that strong monotonicity implies local nonsatiation but not
vice versa. Local nonsatiation rules out "thick" indifference curves.
   Here are two more assumptions that are often used to guarantee nice
behavior of consumer demand functions:

CONVEXITY. Given x, y, and z in X such that x >- z and y >- z,
then it follows that tx + ( 1 - t ) y >_ z for all 0 5 t 5 1.

STRICT CONVEXITY. Given x # y and z in X , i f x                      z and y >- z,
        +
then tx ( 1 - t ) y > z for all 0 < t < 1.

   Given a preference ordering, we often display it graphically. The set
of all consumption bundles that are indifferent to each other is called an
indifference curve. One can think of indifference curves as being level
sets of the utility function; they are analogous to the isoquants used in
production theory. The set of all bundles on or above an indifference curve,
{x in X : x >- y), is called an upper contour set. This is analogous to
the input requirement set used in production theory.
   Convexity implies that an agent prefers averages to extremes, but, other
than that, it has little economic content. Convex preferences may have in-
difference curves that exhibit "flat spots," while strictly convex preferences

  The notation ( x- y(means the Euclidean distance between x and y.
                                                       CONSUMER PREFERENCES   97

have indifference curves that are strictly rotund. Convexity is a general-
ization of the neoclassical assumption of "diminishing marginal rates of
substitution."


EXAMPLE: The existence of a utility function


Existence o f a u t i l i t y function. Suppose preferences are complete, re-
flexive, tmnsitive, continuow, and strongly monotonic. Then there exists a
continuow utility function u : R: -+ R which represents those preferences.


                                                       -
Proof. Let e be the vector in R: consisting of all ones. Then given any
vector x let u ( x ) be that number such that x u ( x ) e . We have to show
that such a number exists and is unique.
  Let B = { t in R : t e >- x } and W = { t in R : x k t e } . Then strong
monotonicity implies B is nonempty; W is certainly nonempty since it
contains 0. Continuity implies both sets are closed. Since the real line is
connected, there is some t , such that t,e    X . We have to show that this
                                                  N


utility function actually represents the underlying preferences. Let

                                  tz where t,e         -
                                                       -
                        U(X) =                             x
                        u ( y )= t ,       where t,e       y.

Then if t , < t,, strong monotonicity shows that t,e 4 t,e, and transitivity
shows that
                               -
                            x t 5 e 4 t,e     y.  N




Similarly, if x + y, then t,e + t,e so that t , must be greater than t,.
   The proof that u ( x ) is a continuous function is somewhat technical and
is omitted. I




EXAMPLE: The marginal rate of substitution

Let u(xl,. . . , xk) be a utility function. Suppose that we increase the
amount of good i ; how does the consumer have to change his consump
tion of good j in order to keep utility constant?
   Following the construction in Chapter 1, page 11, we let dxi and dxj be
the changes in x, and xj. By assumption, the change in utility must be
zero. so
                                       +   aUOw = 0.
                         ax,                axj
98 UTILITY MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 7)


Hence




This expression is known as the marginal rate of substitution between
goods i and j .
  The marginal rate of substitution does not depend on the utility function
chosen to represent the underlying preferences. To prove this, let v(u) be a
monotonic transformation of utility. The marginal rate of substitution for
this utility function is




                                                                           2
7.2 Consumer behavior

Now that we have a convenient way to represent preferences we can begin
to investigate consumer behavior. Our basic hypothesis is that a rational
consumer will always choose a most preferred bundle from the set of af-
fordable alternatives.
   In the basic problem of preference maximization, the set of affordable
alternatives is just the set of all bundles that satisfy the consumer's budget
constraint. Let m be the fixed amount of money available to a consumer,
and let p = (pl, . . . , p k ) be the vector of prices of goods, 1, . . - , k. The set
of affordable bundles, the budget set of the consumer, is given by

                            B = {x in X : px 5 m.)
  The problem of preference maximization can then be written as:

                                    max U(X)
                               such that px 5 m
                                         x is in X.

   Let us note a few basic features of this problem. The first issue is
whether there will exist a solution to this problem. According to Chap-
ter 27, page 506, we need to verify that the objective function is continuous
and that the constraint set is closed and bounded. The utility function is
continuous by assumption, and the constraint set is certainly closed. If
pi > 0 for i = 1,. . . , k and m 2 0, it is not difficult to show that the con-
straint set will be bounded. If some price is zero, the consumer might want
                                                    CONSUMER BEHAVIOR    99


an infinite amount of the corresponding good. We will generally ignore
such boundary problems.
   The second issue we examine concerns the representation of preferences.
Here we can observe that the maximizing choice x* will be independent
of the choice of utility function used to represent the preferences. This is
because the optimal x' must have the property that x'         x for any x in
B , so any utility function that represents the preferences must pick out
x' as a constrained maximum.
   Third, if we multiply all prices and income by some positive constant,
we will not change the budget set, and thus we cannot change the set of
optimal choices. That is, if x* has the property that x* >- x for all x
such that px  <   m , then x* >- y for all y such that t p y 5 tm. Roughly
speaking, the optimal choice set is "homogeneous of degree zero" in prices
and income.
   By making a few regularity assumptions on preferences, we can say more
about the consumer's maximizing behavior. For example, suppose that
preferences satisfy local nonsatiation; can we ever get an x* where px' <
m? Suppose that we could; then, since x* costs strictly less than m , every
bundle in X close enough to x* also costs less than m and is therefore
feasible. But, according to the local nonsatiation hypothesis, there must
be some bundle x which is close to x* and which is preferred to x*. But
this means that x* could not maximize preferences on the budget set B .
   Therefore, under the local nonsatiation assumption, a utility-maximizing
bundle x' must meet the budget constraint with equality. This allows us
to restate the consumer's problem as

                         ~ ( pm,) = max u ( x )
                               such that px = m .

   The function v ( p ,m ) that gives us the maximum utility achievable a t
given prices and income is called the indirect utility function. The
value of x that solves this problem is the consumer's demanded bundle:
it expresses how much of each good the consumer desires at a given level
of prices and income. We assume that there is a unique demanded bundle
at each budget; this is for purposes of convenience and is not essential t o
the analysis.
   The function that relates p and m to the demanded bundle is called
the consumer's demand function. We denote the demand function by
x ( p , m ) . As in the case of the firm, we need to make a few assumptions
to make sure that this demand function is well-defined. In particular, we
will want to assume that there is a unzque bundle that maximizes utility.
We will see later on that strict convexity of preferences will ensure this
behavior.
   Just as in the case of the firm, the consumer's demand function is ho-
mogeneous of degree 0 in ( p .m ) . As we have seen above, multiplying all
100 UTILITY MAXIMIZATION (Ch 7)


prices and income by some positive number does not change the budget
set at all and thus cannot change the answer to the utility maximization
problem.
   As in the case of production we can characterize optimizing behavior by
calculus, as long as the utility function is differentiable. The Lagrangian
for the utility maximization problem can be written as
            "    3

                            ,C = U ( X ) - X(px- m ) ,

where X is the Lagrange multiplier. Differentiating the Lagrangian with
respect to x , gives us the first-order conditions




  In order to interpret these conditions we can divide the zth first-order
condition by the jth first-order condition to eliminate the Lagrange multi-
plier. This gives us




   The fraction on the left is the marginal rate of substitution between good
i and j, and the fraction on the right might be called the economic rate
of substitution between goods z and j. Maximization implies that these
two rates of substitution be equal. Suppose they were not; for example,
suppose




Then, if the consumer gives up one unit of good z and purchases one unit
of good j, he or she will remain on the same indifference curve and have an
extra dollar to spend. Hence, total utility can be increased, contradicting
maximization.
   Figure 7.1 illustrates the argument geometrically. The budget line of the
consumer is given by {x : ~ 1 x 1  +p2x2 = m ) . This can also be written as the
graph of an implicit function: 2 2 = m / p z - ( p l l p 2 ) x l . Hence, the budget
line has slope - p 1 / p 2 and vertical intercept m / p 2 . The consumer wants to
find the point on this budget line that achieves highest utility. This must
clearly satisfy the tangency condition that the slope of the indifference
curve equals the slope of the budget line. Translating this into algebra
gives the above condition.
                                                     CONSUMER BEHAVIOR     101




      GOOD 2 I




                       x   :               GOOD 1




     Preference maximization. The optimal consumption bundle                      Figure
     will be a t a point where an indifference curve is tangent to the            7.1
     budget constraint.

  Finally, we can state the condition using vector terminology. Let x* be
an optimal choice, and let dx be a perturbation of x* that satisfies the
budget constraint. Hence, we must have

                                p(x*fdx) = m.

Since px = m , this equation implies that pdx = 0, which in turn implies
that dx must be orthogonal to p.
  For any such perturbation dx, utility cannot change, or else x* would
not be optimal. Hence, we also have



which says that Du(x*)is also orthogonal to dx. Since this is true for all
perturbations for which pdx = 0, we must have Du(x*) proportional to
p, just as we found in the first-order conditions.
  The second-order conditions for utility maximization can be found by
applying the results of Chapter 27, page 494. The second derivative of the
Lagrangian with respect to goods i and j is d2u(x)/dx,dx3. Hence, the
second-order condition can be written as

                 h t ~ 2 u ( x * )5h0 for all h such that ph = 0.         (7.1)
This condition requires that the Hessian matrix of the utility function is
negative semidefinite for all vectors h orthogonal to the price vector. This is
102 UTILITY MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 7)


essentially equivalent to the requirement that u ( x ) be locally quasiconcave.
Geometrically, the condition means that the upper contour set must lie
above the budget hyperplane at the optimal x*.
   As usual the second-order condition can also be expressed as a condition
involving the bordered Hessian. Examining Chapter 27, page 500, we see
that this formulation says that (7.1) can be satisfied as a strict inequality if
and only if the naturally ordered principal minors of the bordered Hessian
alternate in sign. Hence,




and so on.


7.3 Indirect utility

Recall the indirect utility function defined earlier. This function, v(p, m),
gives maximum utility as a function of p and m.

Properties of the indirect utility function.

  (1) v(p, m) is nonincreasing i n p; that is, i f p' 2 p, v(pl,m) 5 v(p, m).
  Similarly, v(p, m) is nondecreasing in m.

  (2) v(p, m) is homogeneous of degree 0 i n (p, m).

  (3) v(p, m) is quasiconvex i n p; that is, {p : v(p,m) 5 k) is a convex
  set for all k.

  (4) v(p, m) is continuous at all p >> 0, m > 0.

Proof.

(1) Let B = {x : px 5 m) and B' = {x : p'x 5 m) for p' 2 p. Then B' is
contained in B. Hence, the maximum of u(x) over B is at least as big as
the maximum of u(x) over B'. The argument for m is similar.

(2) If prices and income are both multiplied by a positive number, the
budget set doesn't change at all. Thus, v(tp, tm) = v(p, m) for t > 0.
                                                            INDIRECT UTILITY   103


( 3 ) Suppose p and p' are such that v ( p ,m ) < k, v ( p l ,m ) 5 k. Let pl' =
t p + ( 1 - t ) p l . We want to show that v(pl',m ) 5 k . Define the budget sets:

                              B={x:px<m)
                             B' = { x : p'x 5 m )
                                               <
                             B" = { x : pl1x m )

  We will show that any x in B" must be in either B or B'; that is, that
                                                            +
B U B' > B". Assume not; then x is such that tpx ( 1 - t)p1x< m but
px > m and p'x > m. These two inequalities can be written as

                                     tpx > tm
                            ( 1 - t ) p l x> ( 1 - t)m.

Summing, we find that

                               tpx   + ( 1 - t ) p l x> m
which contradicts our original assumption.
  Now note that
             v ( ~ "m,) = max U ( X ) such that x is in B1'
                        < max u(x)such that x is in B U B'
                                      since B U B' > B"
                        <                                       <
                          k since v ( p ,m) 5 k and v ( p l ,m ) k.


(4) This follows from the theorem of the maximum in Chapter 27, page 506.
I

    In Figure 7.2 we have depicted a typical set of "price indifference curves."
These are just the level sets of the indirect utility function. By property
( 1 ) of the above theorem utility is nondecreasing as we move towards the
origin, and by property (3) the lower contour sets are convex. Note that
the lower contour sets lie t o the northeast of the price indifference curves
since indirect utility declines with higher prices.
    We note that if preferences satisfy the local nonsatiation assumption,
then v ( p ,m ) will be strzctly increasing in m. In Figure 7.3 we have drawn
the relationship between v ( p ,m ) and m for constant prices. Since v ( p ,m )
is strictly increasing in m, we can invert the function and solve for m
as a function of the level of utility; that is, given any level of utility, u,
we can read off of Figure 7.3 the minimal amount of income necessary to
achieve utility u at prices p. The function that relates income and utility
in this way-the inverse of the indirect utility function-is known as the
expenditure function and is denoted by e(p,u).
         104 UTILITY MAXIMIZATION (Ch 7)

         PRICE 2




                                    lower contour set




                                                        PRICE 1


Figure             Price indifference curves. The indifference curve is all those
7.2                prices such that v ( p ,m) = k , for some constant k. The lower
                   contour set consists of all prices such that v ( p ,m) 5 k .

         UTILITY (

                                                V(P, m)




                                                  INCOME




Figure             Utility as a function of income. As income increases in -
7.3                rect utility must increase.


           An equivalent definition of the expenditure function is given by the fol-
         lowing problem:
                                     e ( p ,u ) = min px
                                    such that U ( X ) 2 U.
         The expenditure function gives the minimum cost of achieving a fixed level
         of utility.
            The expenditure function is completely analogous to the cost function
         we considered in studying firm behavior. It therefore has all the properties
         we derived in Chapter 5, page 71. These properties are repeated here for
         convenience.

         Properties of the expenditure function.

         (1) e ( p ,u ) is nondecreasing in p .
                                              SOME IMPORTANT IDENTITIES     105


(2) e(p, u) is homogeneous of degree 1 in p.



(4) e(p, u) is continuous in p, for p >> 0.
(5) If h(p,u) is the ezpenditure-minimizing bundle necessary to achieve
utility level u at prices p, then hi(p, u) =             for i = 1,. . . , k as-
                                                  Pz
suming the derivative exists and that pi > 0.

Proof. These are exactly the same properties that the cost function ex-
hibits. See in Chapter 5, page 71 for the arguments. I

   The function h(p, u) is called the Hicksian demand function. The
Hicksian demand function is analogous to the conditional factor demand
functions examined earlier. The Hicksian demand function tells us what
consumption bundle achieves a target level of utility and minimizes total
expenditure.
   A Hicksian demand function is sometimes called a compensated de-
m a n d function. This terminology comes from viewing the demand func-
tion as being constructed by varying prices and income so as to keep the
consumer at a fixed level of utility. Thus, the income changes are arranged
to 'Lcompemate"for the price changes.
   Hicksian demand functions are not directly observable since they depend
on utility, which is not directly observable. Demand functions expressed as
a function of prices and income are observable; when we want to emphasize
the difference between the Hicksian demand function and the usual demand
function, we will refer to the latter as the Marshallian demand function,
x(p,m). The Marshallian demand function is just the ordinary market
demand function we have been discussing all along.


7.4 Some important identities
There are some important identities that tie together the expenditure func-
tion, the indirect utility function, the Marshallian demand function, and
the Hicksian demand function.
   Let us consider the utility maximization problem
                        v(p, m*) = max u(x)
                              such that px 5 m*.
Let x* be the solution to this problem and let u* = u(x*). Consider the
expenditure minimization problem
                        e(p, u*) = min px
                             such that u(x) 2 u*.
    106 UTILITY MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 7)


    An inspection of Figure 7.4 should convince you that in nonperverse cases
    the answers to these two problems should be the same x*. (A more rigorous
    argument is given in the appendix to this chapter.) This simple observation
    leads to four important identities:

                          --
                          -
      (1) e(p, v(p, m))     m. The minimum expenditure necessary to reach
      utility v(p, m) is m.

      (2) v(p, e(p, u))       u. The maximum utility from income e(p, u) is u.

      (3) xi (p, m) = hi (p, v(p, m)). The Marshallian demand at income m is
      the same as the Hicksian demand at utility v(p, m).

      (4) hi(p, u ) r xi(p, e(p, u)). The Hicksian demand at utility u is the
      same as the Marshallian demand at income e(p, u).

       This last identity is perhaps the most important since it ties together
    the "observable" Marshallian demand function with the "unobservable"
    Hicksian demand function. Identity (4) shows that the Hicksian demand
    function-the solution to the expenditure minimization problem-is equal
    to the Marshallian demand function at an appropriate level of i n c o m e
    namely, the minimum income necessary at the given prices to achieve the
    desired level of utility. Thus, any demanded bundle can be expressed either
    as the solution to the utility maximization problem or the expenditure
    minimization problem. In the appendix to this chapter we give the exact
    conditions under which this equivalence holds. For now, we simply explore
    the consequences of this duality.
       It is this link that gives rise to the term "compensated demand function."
    The Hicksian demand function is simply the Marshallian demand functions
    for the various goods if the consumer's income is "compensated" so as to
    achieve some target level of utility.
       A nice application of one of these identities is given in the next proposi-
    tion:
    Roy's identity. If x(p, m) is the Marshallian demand function, then


                    x ~ ( P ,m) = -              for i = l , . . . , k
                                      WP,m)
    provided, of course, that the right-hand side is well defined and that pi > 0
\   andm>O.

    Proof. Suppose that x* yields a maximal utility of u* at (p*,m*). We
    know from our identities that
                                     m*) = h(p*,u*).
                                  ~(p*,                                     (7.2)
                                                 SOME IMPORTANT IDENTITIES   107




                              GOOD 1




      Maximize utility and minimize expenditure. Normally,                         Figure
      a consumption bundle that maximizes utility will also minimize               7.4
      expenditure and vice versa.




                                  -
From another one of the fundamental identities, we also know that

                             U*        v(p, e(p,u*)).

This identity says that no matter what prices are, if you give the consumer
the minimal income t o get utility u* a t those prices, then the maximal
utility he can get is u*.
  Since this is an identity we can differentiate it with respect to pi t o get




Rearranging, and combining this with identity (7.2), we have




Since this identity is satisfied for all (p*,m*) and since x* = x(p*,m*),
the result is proved. I

   The above proof, though elegant, is not particularly instructive. Here is


                                        -
an alternative direct proof of Roy's identity. The indirect utility function
is given by
                           v(p1 m ) U(X(P,m ) ) .
If we differentiate this with respect t o p,, we find
                                                                       (7.3)
108 UTILITY MAXIMIZATION (Ch 7 )


Since x ( p , m ) is the demand function, it satisfies the first-order conditions
for utility maximization. Substituting the first-order conditions into ex-
pression (7.4) gives



The demand functions also satisfy the budget constraint p x ( p , m ) = m .
Differentiating this identity with respect to p,, we have




Substitute (7.6) into (7.5) to find




Now we differentiate (7.3) with respect to m to find




Differentiating the budget constraint with respect to m, we have




Substituting (7.9) into (7.8) gives us




This equation simply says that the Lagrange multiplier in the first-order
condition is the marginal utility of income. Combining (7.7) and (7.10)
gives us Roy's identity.
   Finally, for one last proof of Roy's identity, we note that it is an immedi-
ate consequence of the envelope theorem described in Chapter 27, page 501.
The argument given above is just going through the steps of the proof of
this theorem.


7.5 The money metric utility functions

There is a nice construction involving the expenditure function that comes
up in a variety of places in welfare economics. Consider some prices p and
                                         THE MONEY METRIC UTILITY FUNCTIONS    109


some given bundle of goods x. We can ask the following question: how
much money would a given consumer need at the prices p to be as well off
as he could be by consuming the bundle of goods x?
  Figure 7.5 tells us how to construct the answer to this question graphi-
cally if we know the consumer's preferences. We just see how much money
the consumer would need to reach the indifference curve passing through
x. Mathematically, we simply solve the following problem:

                                   min pz
                                     e
                             such that u(z) 2 u(x)




                                GOOD 1


      Direct money metric utility function. The money met-                            Figure
      ric utility function gives the minimum expenditure at prices p                  7.5
      necessary to purchase a bundle at least as good as x.



   This type of function occurs so often that it is worthwhile giving it a
special name; following Samuelson (1974) we call it the money metric
utility function. It is also known as the "minimum income function,"
the "direct compensation function," and by a variety of other names. An
alternative definition is



   It is easy to see that for fixed x, u(x) is fixed, so m(p, x) behaves exactly
like an expenditure function: it is monotonic, homogeneous, concave in p,
and so on. What is not as obvious is that when p is fixed, m(p, x) is in
fact a utility function. The proof is simple: for fixed prices the expenditure
function is increasing in the level of utility: if you want to get a higher utility
level, you have to spend more money. In fact, the expenditure function
is strictly increasing in u for continuous, locally nonsatiated preferences.
         110 UTILITY MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 7)


         Hence, for fixed p, m(p, x) is simply a monotonic transform of the utility
         function and is therefore itself a utility function.
           This is easily seen in Figure 7.5. All points on the indifference curve
         passing through x will be assigned the same level of m(p, x), and all points
         on higher indifference curves will be assigned a higher level. This is all it
         takes to be a utility function.
           There is a similar construct for indirect utility known as the money
         metric indirect utility function. It is given by



         That is, p(p; q, m) measures how much money one would need at prices
         p to be as well off as one would be facing prices q and having income m.
         Just as in the direct case, p(p; q, m) behaves like an expenditure function
         with respect to p, but now it behaves like an indirect utility function with
         respect to q and m, since it is, after all, simply a monotonic transformation
         of an indirect utility function. See Figure 7.6 for a graphical example.
            A nice feature of the direct and indirect compensation functions is that
         they contain only observable arguments. They are speczfic direct and indi-
         rect utility functions that measure something of interest, and there is no
         ambiguity regarding monotonic transformations. We will find this feature
         to be useful in our discussion of integrability theory and welfare economics.

           GOOD 2




Figure        Indirect money metric utility function. This function
7.6           gives the minimum expenditure at prices p for the consumer to
              be as well off as he would be facing prices q and having income
              m.
                                    THE MONEY METRIC UTILITY FUNCTIONS     111



EXAMPLE: The Cobb-Douglas utility function

The Cobb-Douglas utility function is given by: u(xl, 22) = x ; " x ~ - ~ .
                                                                        Since
any monotonic transform of this function represents the same preferences,
                                      +
we can also write u(xl, x2) = a In XI (1 - a ) In x2.
  The expenditure function and Hicksian demand functions are the same,
up to a change in notation, as the cost function and conditional factor
demands derived in Chapter 4, page 54. The Marshallian demand functions
and the indirect utility function can be derived by solving the following
problem:
                                      +
                           max a In xl (1 - a ) In x2
                      such that plxl + ~ 2 x 2= m.
The first-order conditions are




Cross multiply and use the budget constraint to get




Substitute into the budget constraint to get the second Marshallian de-
mand:
                                         (1 - a)m
                       x ~ ( P I , P ~=, ~ )
                                             Pa
Substitute into the objective function and eliminate constants to get the
indirect utility function:

                v(pl,p2,m) = l n m - a l n p l - (1 - a)1np2.          (7.11)

  A quicker way to derive the indirect utility function is to invert the Cobb-
Douglas cost/expenditure function we derived in Chapter 4, page 54. This
gives us
                         e@1,p;?,u)= K P ? P ; - ~ ~ ,
112 UTILITY MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 7)


where K is some constant depending on a. Inverting the expression by
                , u) by m, and 21 by PI, pa, m), we get
replacing 4 ~ 1p2,



This is just a monotonic transform of (7.11) as can be seen by taking the
logarithm of both sides.
  The money metric utility functions can be derived by substitution. We
have
                       m(p, x) = K P ; ~ P : - ~ ~ (22)
                                                     ~I,
                                        a 1-a a 1-a
                                   = KP~P, X l X 2
and




EXAMPLE: The CES utility function

                                                      +
The CES utility function is given by u(xl,x2) = (xf x$)'/p. Since pref-
erences are invariant with respect to monotonic transforms of utility, we
                                               +
could just as well choose u(xl, xz) = $ ln(xf x;).
  We have seen earlier that the cost function for the CES technology has
the form c(w, y) = (W;+W$)'/''~where T = p/(p- 1). Thus the expenditure
function for the CES utility function must have the form
                                            r 1/r
                          e(p, 21) = (P; + ~ 2 ) u.
We can find the indirect utility function by inverting the above equation:


The demand functions can be found by Roy's law:




  The money metric utility functions for the CES utility function can also
be found by substitution:
                                                                                 Notes 113


APPENDIX
Consider the following two problems:

                                          max U ( X )
                                    such that px 5 m.


                                          min px
                                   such that U ( X ) 2 U .
    Assume that

    ( 1 ) the utility function is continuous;

    ( 2 ) preferences satisfy local nonsatiation;

    ( 3 ) answers to both problems exist.

U t i l i t y m a x i m i z a t i o n implies e x p e n d i t u r e minimization. Suppose that
the above assumptzons are satzsfied. Let x* be a solutzon to (7.12), and let u =
u ( x 8 ) . Then x* solves (7.13).

Proof. Suppose not, and let x' solve (7.13). Hence, px' < px* and u ( x l ) 2
u ( x * ) . By local nonsatiation there is a bundle x" close enough to x' so that
px" < px* = m and u(xt')> u ( x * ) .But then x* cannot be a solution to (7.12).
I

E x p e n d i t u r e minimization implies u t i l i t y maximization. Suppose that
the above assumptzons are satzsfied and that x* solves (7.13). Let m = px* and
suppose that m > 0. Then x* solves (7.12).

Proof. Suppose not, and let x' solve (7.12) so that u ( x ' ) > u ( x * ) and px' =
px* = m. Since px* > 0 and utility is continuous, we can find 0 < t < 1 such
that ptx' < px* = m and u ( t x l )> u ( x B ) .Hence, x* cannot solve (7.13). 1


Notes

The argument for the existence of a utility function is based on Wold (1943).
A general theorem on the existence of a utility function can be found in
Debreu (1964).
  The importance of the indirect utility function was first recognized by
Roy (1942), Roy (1947). The expenditure function seems to be due to
Hicks (1946). The dual approach to consumer theory described follows
that of McFadden & Winter (1968). The money metric utility function
was used by McKenzie (1957) and Samuelson (1974).
114 UTILITY MAXIMIZATION (Ch. 7)



Exercises

7.1. Consider preferences defined over the nonnegative orthant by (xl, x2) >
(yl, y2) if X I + 2 2 < y1+ 92. DO these preferences exhibit local nonsatiation?
If these are the only two consumption goods and the consumer faces positive
prices, will the consumer spend all of his income? Explain.

7.2. A consumer has a utility function u(xl, xz) = max(x1, x2). What is
the consumer's demand function for good l ? What is his indirect utility
function? What is his expenditure function?

7.3. A consumer has an indirect utility function of the form




What is the form of the expenditure function for this consumer? What is
the form of a (quasiconcave) utility function for this consumer? What is
the form of the demand function for good l ?

7.4. Consider the indirect utility function given by




  (a) What are the demand functions?

  (b) What is the expenditure function?
  (c)   What is the direct utility function?

7.5. A consumer has a direct utility function of the form



Good 1 is a discrete good; the only possible levels of consumption of good 1
are x1 = 0 and x1 = 1. For convenience, assume that u(0) = 0 and p2 = 1.

  (a) What kind of preferences does this consumer have?

  (b) The consumer will definitely choose xl = 1 if pl is strictly less than
what?

  (c) What is the algebraic form of the indirect utility function associated
with this direct utility function?
                                                            Exercises   1 15


7.6. A consumer has an indirect utility function of the form v(p,m) =
A(P)~.
  (a) What kind of preferences does this consumer have?

  (b) What is the form of this consumer's expenditure function, e(p, u)?

  (c) What is the form of this consumer's indirect money metric utility
function, p(p; q, m)?

   (d) Suppose instead that the consumer had an indirect utility function
of the form v(p,m) = A(p)mb for b > 1. What will be the form of the
consumer's indirect money metric utility function now?
                        CHAPTER            8
                     CHOICE

In this chapter we will examine the comparative statics of consumer d e
mand behavior: how the consumer's demand changes as prices and income
change. As in the case of the firm, we will approach this problem in three
different ways: by differentiating the first-order conditions, by using the
properties of the expenditure and indirect utility functions, and by using
the algebraic inequalities implied by the optimizing model.


8.1 Comparative statics
Let us examine the two-good consumer maximization problem in a bit more
detail. It is of interest to look at how the consumer's demand changes as
we change the parameters of the problem. Let's hold prices fixed and allow
income to vary; the resulting locus of utility-maximizing bundles is known
as the income expansion path. From the income expansion path, we can
derive a function that relates income to the demand for each commodity
(at constant prices). These functions are called Engel curves. Several
possibilities arise:

(1) The income expansion path (and thus each Engel curve) is a straight
line through the origin. In this case the consumer is said to have demand
                                                 COMPARATIVE STATICS   117


curves with unit income elasticity. Such a consumer will consume the same
proportion of each commodity at each level of income.

(2) The income expansion path bends towards one good or the other-i.e.,
as the consumer gets more income, he consumes more of both goods but
proportionally more of one good (the luxury good) than of the other (the
necessary good).

(3) The income expansion path could bend backwards-in this case an in-
crease in income means the consumer actually wants to consume less of
one of the goods. For example, one might argue that as income increases
I would want to consume fewer potatoes. Such goods are called inferior
goods; goods for which more income means more demand are called nor-
mal goods. (See Figure 8.1.)



GOOD 2                           GOOD 2




                        GOOD 1                 GOOD 1                  GOOD 1

                 A                         B                      C


         Income expansion paths. Panel A depicts unit elastic de-               Figure
         mands, in panel B good 2 is a luxury good, and in panel C ,            8.1
         good 1 is an inferior good.




   We can also hold income fixed and allow prices to vary. If we let pl
vary and hold pz and m fixed, our budget line will tilt, and the locus of
tangencies will sweep out a curve known as the price offer curve. In the
first case in Figure 8.2 we have the ordinary case where a lower price for
good 1 leads to greater demand for the good; in the second case we have a
situation where a decrease in the price of good 1 brings about a decreased
demand for good 1. Such a good is called a Giffen good. An example
might again be potatoes; if the price of potatoes goes down I can buy just
         118 CHOICE (Ch. 8)


         as many of them as I could before and still have some money left over.
         I could use this leftover money to buy more pasta. But now that I am
         consuming more pasta I don't even want to consume as many potatoes as
         I did before.



         GOOD 2 1                              GOOD 2 1




                                          GOOD 1                                  GOOD 1
                              A                                     B      .
Figure          Offer curves. In panel A the demand for good 1 increases as
8.2             the price decreases so it is an ordinary good. In panel B the
                demand for good 1 decreases as its price decreases, so it is a
                Giffen good.


           In the above example we see that a fall in the price of a good may have two
         sorts of effects--one commodity will become less expensive than another,
         and total "purchasing power" may change. A fundamental result of the
         theory of the consumer, the Slutsky equation, relates these two effects. We
         will derive the Slutsky equation later in several ways.


         EXAMPLE: Excise and income taxes

         Suppose we wish to tax a utility-maximizing consumer to obtain a certain
         amount of revenue. Initially, the consumer's budget constraint is plxl     +
         ~ 2 x 2= m, but after we impose a tax on sales of good 1, the consumer's
                                          +         +
         budget constraint becomes (pl t)xl ~ 2 x 2= m. The effect of this
         excise tax is illustrated in Figure 8.3. If we denote the after-tax level of
         consumption by (x;, xa), then the revenue collected by the tax is tx;.
           Suppose now that we decide to collect this same amount of revenue by
         a tax on income. The budget constraint of the consumer would then be
         ~1x1 +p2x2 = m - tx; . This is a line with slope -p1/p2 that passes through
                                                   THE SLUTSKY EQUATION    119


(x;, x;), as shown in Figure 8.3. Notice that since this budget line cuts the
indifference curve through (x;, x;), the consumer can achieve a higher level
of utility from an income tax than from a commodity tax, even though they
both generate the same revenue.




  Consumpt~on
  with sales tax




  Consumpt~on
 w~thincome tax


                                                   GOOD I




     Excise tax and income tax. A consumer is always worse                        Figure
     off facing an excise tax than an income tax that generates the               8.3
     same revenue.




8.2 The Slutsky equation

We have seen that the Hicksian, or compensated demand curve, is formally
the same as the conditional factor demand discussed in the theory of the
firm. Hence it has all the same properties; in particular, it has a symmetric,
negative semidefinite substitution matrix.
   In the case of the firm, this sort of restriction was an observable restric-
tion on firm behavior, since the output of the firm is an observable variable.
In the case of the consumer, this sort of restriction does not appear to be
of much use since utility is not directly observable.
   However, it turns out that this appearance is misleading. Even though
the compensated demand function is not dzrectly observable, we shall see
that its derivative can be easily calculated from observable things, namely,
the derivative of the Marshallian demand with respect to price and income.
This relationship is known as the Slutsky equation.
120 CHOICE (Ch. 8 )


Slutsky equation.




Proof. Let x* maximize utility at ( p * ,m * ) and let u* = u ( x * ) . It is
identically true that



We can differentiate this with respect to pi and evaluate the derivative at
p* to get

                         - a x j ( P * ,m * )
           ahj (P* 7 u*) -                      +   dxj ( p * ,m * ) d e ( p * ,u * )
                a ~ i              a ~ i                 dm               a ~ i '

Note carefully the meaning of this expression. The left-hand side is how
the compensated demand changes when pi changes. The right-hand side
says that this change is equal to the change in demand holding expenditure
fixed at m* plus the change in demand when income changes times how
much income has to change to keep utility constant. But this last term,
d e ( p * ,u*)/dpi7is just xf; rearranging gives us

                a x j ( P * ,m * ) - ahj ( p * ,u*) - dxj ( p * ,rn*)
                       &t                a ~ i             dm
which is the Slutsky equation. I

  The Slutsky equation decomposes the demand change induced by a price
change Api into two separate effects: the substitution effect and the
income effect:



  We can also consider the effects from all prices changing at once; in
this case we just interpret the derivatives as generalized n-dimensional
derivatives rather than partial derivatives. In the two-good case the Slutsky
equation looks like this:
                                                 THE SLUTSKY EQUATION   121


where u = v(p, m).
 Expanding the last term gives




  Suppose we consider a price change A p = (Apl, Ap2) and we are inter-
ested in the approximate change in demand A x = (Axl, Ax 2 ). According
to the Slutsky equation, we can calculate this change using the expression




The first vector is the substitution effect. It indicates how the Hicksian
demands change. Since changes in Hicksian demands keep utility constant,
(Ax:, Ax:) will be tangent to the indifference curve. The second vector
is the income effect. The price change has caused "purchasing power"
                     +
to change by xlApl x2Ap2 and the vector (Ax?, Ax?) measures the
impact of this change on demand, with prices held constant at the initial
level. This vector therefore lies along the income expansion path.
   We can do a similar decomposition for finite changes in demand as il-
lustrated in Figure 8.4. Here prices change from        to p', and demand
changes from x to x'. To construct the Hicks decomposition, we first pivot
the budget line around the indifference curve to find the optimal bundle at
prices p' with utility fked at the original level. Then we shift the budget
line out to the x' to find the income effect. The total effect is the sum of
these two movements.


EXAMPLE: The Cobb-Douglas Slutsky equation

Let us check the Slutsky equation in the CobbDouglas case. As we've
seen, in this case we have
         122 CHOICE (Ch. 8)

                  GOOD 2   1


                Total
                effect




         Subst~tutlon
              effect



                                                      GOOD 1




Figure          The Hicks decomposition of a demand change. We can
8.4             decompose the change in demand into two movements: the sub-
                stitution effect and the income effect.
         Thus




         Now plug into the Slutsky equation to find




         8.3 Properties of demand fundions
         The properties of the expenditure function give us an easy way to develop
         the main propositions of the neoclassical theory of consumer behavior:
                 COMPARATIVE STATICS USING THE FIRST-ORDER CONDITIONS      123


(1) The matrix of substitution terms (dhj(p, u)/dpi) is negative semidefin-
ite. This follows because


which is negative semidefinite because the expenditure function is concave.
(See Chapter 27, page 496.)
(2) The matrix of substitution terms is symmetricsince




(3) In particular, "the compensated own-price eflect is nonpositive"; that
is, the Hicksian demand curves slope downward:



since the substitution matrix is negative semidefinite and thus has non-
positive diagonal terms.
   These restrictions all concern the Hicksian demand functions, which are
not directly observable. However, as we indicated earlier the Slutsky equa-
tion allows us to express the derivatives of h with respect to p as derivatives
of x with respect to p and m, and these are observable. For example, Slut-
sky's equation and the above remarks yield

(4) The substitution matrix                                     is a symmet~e,
negative semidefinite matrix.
   This is a rather nonintuitive result: a particular combination of price and
income derivatives has to result in a negative semidefinite matrix. However,
it follows inexorably from the logic of maximizing behavior.


8.4 Comparative statics using the first-order conditions
The Slutsky equation can also be derived by differentiating the first-order
conditions. Since the calculations are a bit tedious, we will limit ourselves




                                                         _
to the case of two goods and just sketch the broad outlines of the argument.
  In this case the first-order conditions take the form
                 Plxl(~l~p2, +                       - )m = 0
                             m~) 2 ~ 2 ( P l r p 2 , m
                                        Apl
                                      -2 l
                 a~(xl(~1,~2,m),~2(~1,~    m))
                                8x1
124 CHOICE (Ch. 8)


  Differentiating with respect to pl, and arranging in matrix form, we have




  Solving for dxl/dpl via Cramer's rule gives us




where H > 0 is the determinant of the bordered Hessian.
 Expanding this determinant by cofactors on the second column, we have




This is beginning to look a bit like Slutsky's equation already. Note that
the first term-which turns out to be the substitution effect-is negative as
required. Now go back to the first-order conditions and differentiate them
with respect to m. We have




SO, by Cramer's rule,
                                     I -P1   Ul2   l

   Substituting into the equation for dxl/dpl derived above, we have the
income-effect part of Slutsky's equation. In order to derive the substitu-
tion effect, we need to set up the expenditure minimization problem and
calculate d h l / d p l . This calculation is analogous to the calculation of the
conditional factor demand functions in Chapter 4, page 59. The resulting
expression can be shown to be equal to the substitution term in the above
equation, which establishes Slutsky's equation.
                                                THE INTEGRABILITY PROBLEM     125



8.5 The integrability problem

We have seen that the utility maximization hypothesis imposes certain
observable restrictions on consumer behavior. In particular, we know that
the matrix of substitution terms,




must be a symmetric, negative semidefinite matrix.
  Suppose that we were given a system of demand functions which had a
symmetric, negative semidefinite substitution matrix. Is there necessarily
a utility function from which these demand functions can be derived? This
question is known as the integrability problem.
  As we have seen, there are several equivalent ways t o describe consumer
preferences. We can use a utility function, an indirect utility function,
an expenditure function, and so on. The indirect utility function and the
expenditure function are quite convenient ways to solve the integrability
problem.
  For example, Roy's law tells us that




Generally, we have been given an indirect utility function and then used
this identity to calculate the demand functions. However, the integrability
problem asks the reverse question: given the demand functions, and the
i = 1 , . . . , lc relationships in (8.1), how can we solve these equations to
find v(p, m)? Or, more fundamentally, how do we even know if a solution
exists?
   The system of equations given in (8.1) is a system of p a r t i a l differential
equations. The integrability problem asks us to determine a solution of
this set of equations.
   As it turns out, it is somewhat easier to pose this question in terms of
the expenditure function rather than the indirect utility function. Suppose
that we are given some set of demand functions (zi(p,m)) for i = 1 , . . . , k.
Let us pick some point x0 = x(pO,m) and arbitrarily assign it utility uO.
How can we construct the expenditure function e(p, uo)? Once we have
found an expenditure function consistent with the demand functions, we
can use it to solve for the implied direct or indirect utility function.
   If such an expenditure function does exist, it certainly must satisfy the
system of partial differential equations given by
126 CHOICE (Ch. 8 )


and initial condition


These equations simply state that the Hicksian demand for each good at
utility u is the Marshallian demand at income e(p, u). Now the integra-
bility condition described in Chapter 26, page 484, says that a system of
partial differential equations of the form



has a (local) solution if and only if




Applying this condition to the above problem, we see that it reduces to
requiring that the matrix




is symmetric. But this is just the Slutsky restriction! Thus the Slutsky
restrictions imply that the demand functions can be "integrated" to find
an expenditure function consistent with the observed choice behavior.
   This symmetry condition is enough to ensure that there will exist a
function e(p, uO) that will satisfy the equations (8.2) at least over some
range. (Conditions that ensure a solution exists globally are somewhat
more involved.) However, in order for this to be a bona fide expenditure
function it must also be concave in prices. That is, the second derivative
matrix of e(p,u) must be negative semidefinite. But, we have already
seen that the second derivative matrix of e(p,u) is simply the Slutsky
substitution matrix. If this is negative semidefinite, then the solution to
the above partial differential equations must be concave.
   These observations give us a solution to the integrability problem. Given
a set of demand functions (xi(p,m)), we simply have to verify that they
have a symmetric, negative semidefinite substitution matrix. If they do,
we can, in principle, solve the system of equations given in (8.2) to find an
expenditure function consistent with those demand functions.
   There is a nice trick that will allow us to recover the indirect utility
function from demand functions, at the same time that we recover the
expenditure function. Equation (8.2) is valid for all utility levels uO,so let
us choose some base prices q and income level m, and let u0 = v(q,m).
With this substitution, we can write (8.2) as
                                               THE INTEGRABILITY PROBLEM   127


where the boundary condition now becomes



  Recall the definition of the (indirect) money metric utility function in
Chapter 7, page 109: p ( p ; q, m) = e(p, v(q, m)). Using this definition, we
can also write this system of equations as follows:




We refer to this system as the integrability equations. A function
p ( p ; q, m) that solves this problem gives us an indirect utility function-a
particular indirect utility function-that describes the observed demand
behavior x ( p , m). This money metric utility function is often very conve-
nient for applied welfare analysis.


EXAMPLE: Integrability with two goods

If there are only two goods being consumed, the integrability equations
take a very simple form since there is only one independent variable, the
relative price of the two goods. Similarly, there is only one independent
equation since if we know the demand for one good, we can find the demand
for the other through the budget constraint.
   Let us normalize the price of good 2 to be 1, and write p for the price of
the first good and x(p, m) for its demand function. Then the integrability
equations become a single equation plus a boundary condition:




This is just an ordinary differential equation with boundary condition which
can be solved using standard techniques.
  For example, suppose that we have a log-linear demand function:

                          lnx = a l n p   + blnm + c
                            x = pambec

The integrability equation is
128 CHOICE (Ch. 8)


Rearranging, we have




Integrating this expression,




                                                        eC

for b # 1. Solving this equation yields




EXAMPLE: Integrability with several goods

We now consider a case where there are three goods and thus two inde-
pendent demand equations. For definiteness consider the Cobb-Douglas
system:
                                         a1m
                                    21 = -
                                           Pl


  We verified earlier that this system satisfies Slutsky symmetry so that
we know that the integrability equations will have a solution. We simply
have t o solve the following system of partial differential equations:




The first equation implies that

                               l n p = a1 lnpl   + C1
                                               DUALITY IN CONSUMPTION     129

for some constant of integration C1, and the second equation implies that

                            l n p = a21np2   + Cz
So it is natural to look for a solution of the form



where C3 is independent of pl and p2.
 Substituting into the boundary condition, we have



Solving this equation for C3 and substituting into the proposed solution,
we have



which is indeed the money metric indirect utility function for the Cobb-
Douglas utility function. See Chapter 7, page 111, for another derivation
of this function.


8.6 Duality in consumption

We have seen how one can recover an indirect utility function from observed
demand functions by solving the integrability equations. Here we see how
to solve for the direct utility function.
   The answer exhibits quite nicely the duality between direct and indirect
utility functions. It is most convenient to describe the calculations in terms
of the normalized indirect utility function, where we have prices divided by
income so that expenditure is identically one. Thus the normalized indirect
utility function is given by

                            v(p)= max u(x)
                                      X

                              such that px = 1.

   It turns out that if we are given the indirect utility function v(p),we can
find the direct utility function by solving the following problem:

                             u(x)= min v(p)
                                      P
                               such that px = 1

  The proof is not difficult, once you see what is going on. Let x be the
demanded bundle at the prices p. Then by definition v(p) = u(x). Let
         130 CHOICE (Ch 8)


         GOOD 2   1




                             Opttmal bundle at


                                    Opt~malbundle at
                                    d~fferentbudget at
                                    wh~chx 1s affordable




                                                      GOOD 1


Figure            Solving for the direct utility function. The utility associ-
8.5               ated with the bundle x must be no larger than the utility that
                  can be achieved at any prices p at which x is affordable.

         p' be any other price vector that satisfies the budget constraint so that
         p'x = 1. Then since x is always a feaszble choice at the prices p', due to
         the form of the budget set, the utility-maximizing choice must yield utility
                                                                       >
         at least as great as the utility yielded by x; that is, v(pl) u(x) = v(p).
         Hence, the minimum of the indirect utility function over all p's that satisfy
         the budget constraint gives us the utility of x.
            The argument is depicted in Figure 8.5. Any price vector p that satisfies
         the budget constraint px = 1 must yield a higher utility than u(x), which
         is simply to say that u(x) solves the minimization problem posed above.


         EXAMPLE: Solving for the direct utility function

         Suppose that we have an indirect utility function given by v(p1,p2) =
         -alnpl - blnp2. What is its associated direct utility function? We set up
         the minimization problem:

                                      min -alnpl - blnp2
                                      Pl3PZ

                                     such that p l x l + ~ 2 x 2= 1.

         The first-order conditions are
                                                    REVEALED PREFERENCE    131

Adding together and using the budget constraint yields



Substitute back into the first-order conditions to find




  These are the choices of (pl,p2) that minimize indirect utility. Now
substitute these choices into the indirect utility function:

                                       a               b
                u ( x ~ , x=
                           ~ )-aln           - bln
                                   (a + b)xl       (a + b1.2
                                     +       +
                          = a In XI b In x2 constant.

This is the familiar Cobb-Douglas utility function.


8.7 Revealed preference

In our study of consumer behavior we have taken preferences as the prim-
itive concept and derived the restrictions that the utility maximization
model imposes on the observed demand functions. These restrictions are
basically the Slutsky restrictions that the matrix of substitution terms be
symmetric and negative semidefinite.
   These restrictions are in principle observable, but in practice they leave
something to be desired. After all, who has really seen a demand function?
The best that we may hope for in practice is a list of the choices made un-
der different circumstances. For example, we may have some observations
on consumer behavior that take the form of a list of prices, p t , and the
associated chosen consumption bundles, xt for t = 1,.. . , T. How can we
tell whether these data could have been generated by a utility-maximizing
consumer?
   We will say that a utility function rationalizes the observed behavior
                                     >                                 >
(p t , x t ) for t = 1,.. - , T if u(x t ) u(x) for all x such that ptxt p t x.
That is, u(x) rationalizes the observed behavior if it achieves its maximum
value on the budget set at the chosen bundles. Suppose that the data were
generated by such a maximization process. What observable restrictions
must the observed choices satisfy?
   Without any assumptions about u(x) there is a trivial answer to this
question, namely, no restrictions. For suppose that u(x) were a constant
function, so that the consumer was indifferent to all observed consumption
132 CHOICE (Ch. 8)


bundles. Then there would be no restrictions imposed on the patterns of
observed choices: anything is possible.
   To make the problem interesting, we have to rule out this trivial case.
The easiest way to do this is to require the underlying utility function to be
locally nonsatiated. Our question now becomes: what are the observable
restrictions imposed by the maximization of a locally nonsatiated utility
function?
   First, we note that if ptxt    >    p t x, then it must be the case that u ( x t ) 2
u ( x ) . Since xt was chosen when x could have been chosen, the utility of xt
must be at least as large as the utility of x . In this case we will say that xt is
directly revealed preferred to x , and write x t R D x. As a consequence of
this definition and the assumption that the data were generated by utility
maximization, we can conclude that "xtRDximplies u ( x t )2 u(x)."
   Suppose that ptxt > p t x. Does it follow that u ( x t ) > u(x)? It is not
hard to show that local nonsatiation implies this conclusion. For we know
from the previous paragraph that u ( x t ) 2 u ( x ) ;if u ( x t ) = u ( x ) , then by
local nonsatiation there would exist some other x' close enough to x so that
ptxt > ptx' and u(x') > u ( x ) = u ( x t ) .This contradicts the hypothesis of
utility maximization.
   If ptxt > p t x, we will say that xt is strictly directly revealed pre-
 ferred t o x and write x t P D x .
   Now suppose that we have a sequence of such revealed preference com-
parisons such that xt R ~ x ~ ,    xjRDxk1. . . , x n RDx. In this case we will say
that xt is revealed preferred t o x and write x t Rx. The relation R is
sometimes called the transitive closure of the relation R ~If .we assume
that the data were generated by utility maximization, it follows that "xtRx
                >
implies u ( x t ) u(x)."
   Consider two observations xt and x". We now have a way to determine
whether u(xt) 2 u ( x S )and an observable condition t o determine whether
u ( x S )> u ( x t ) . Obviously, these two conditions should not both be satis-
fied. This condition can be stated as the

GENERALIZED AXIOM OF REVEALED PREFERENCE. If
xt is revealed preferred to x S , then x" cannot be strictly directly revealed
preferred to xt .

  Using the symbols defined above, we can also write this axiom as

GARP. xt R x s implies not xS pD x t . I n other words, xt R x S implies
p5xS 5 psxt.

  As the name implies, GARP is a generalization of various other revealed
preference tests. Here are two standard conditions.
                                 SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR MAXIMIZATION        133

WEAK AXIOM OF REVEALED PREFERENCE (WARP). If
xt R D x h n d x t is not equal to x S , then it is not the case that x s R D x t .

STRONG AXIOM OF REVEALED PREFERENCE (SARP). If
x t R x s and x t is not equal to x S , then it is not the case that x s R x t .

  Each of these axioms requires that there be a unique demand bundle at
each budget, while GARP allows for multiple demanded bundles. Thus,
GARP allows for flat spots in the indifference curves that generated the
observed choices.


8.8 Sufficient conditions for maximization

If the data (p t , x t ) were generated by a utility-maximizing consumer with
nonsatiated preferences, the data must satisfy GARP. Hence, GARP is an
observable consequence of utility maximization. But does it express all the
implications of that model? If some data satisfy this axiom, is it necessarily
true that it must come from utility maximization, or at least be thought
of in that way? Is GARP a suficient condition for utility maximization?
   It turns out that it is. If a finite set of data is consistent with GARP,
then there exists a utility function that rationalizes the observed behavior-
i.e., there exists a utility function that could have generated that behavior.
Hence, GARP exhausts the list of restrictions imposed by the maximization
model.
   The following theorem is the nicest way to state this result.

Afriat's theorem. Let (p t , x t ) for t = 1 , . . . ,T be a finite number of
observations of price vectors and consumption bundles. Then the following
conditions are equivalent.

(1) There exists a locally nonsatiated utilzty function that rationalizes the
data;

(2) The data satisfy GARP;

(3) There exzst positzve numbers (u t , At) for t = 1, . . . , T that satisfy the
Afmat inequalitzes:

                    us 5 ut   + Atpt(xS- x t ) for all t , s ;

(4) There exists a locally nonsatiated, continuous, concave, monotonic util-
ity function that rationalizes the data.
134 CHOICE (Ch 8)


Proof. We have already seen that (1) implies ( 2 ) . The proof that ( 2 )
implies ( 3 ) is omitted; see Varian (1982a) for the argument. The proof
that (4) implies ( 1 ) is trivial. All that is left is the proof that (3) implies
(4).
   We establish this implication consfructively by exhibiting a utility func-
tion that does the trick. Define



                                                        >
Note that this function is continuous. As long as pt 0 and no pt = 0, the
function will be locally nonsatiated and monotonic. It is also not difficult
to show that it is concave. Geometrically, this function is just the lower
envelope of a finite number of hyperplanes.
  We need to show that this function rationalizes the data; that is, when
prices are pt, this utility function achieves its constrained maximum at x t .
F i t we show that u ( x t )= ut. If this were not the case, we would have



But this violates one of the Afriat inequalities. Hence, u ( x t )= ut.
                              >
 Now suppose that p s x s p S x. It follows that



                          >
This shows that u ( x s ) u ( x ) for all x such that p S x 5 p s x S . In other
words, U ( X ) rationalizes the observed choices. I

   The utility function defined in the proof of Afriat's theorem has a nat-
ural interpretation. Suppose that u ( x ) is a concave, differentiable utility
function that rationalizes the observed choices. The fact that u ( x ) is dif-
ferentiable implies it must satisfy the T first-order conditions



The fact that u ( x ) is concave implies that it must satisfy the concavity
conditions
                                     +
                      u ( x t )5 u ( x S ) D U ( X ' ) ( X ~ - x S ) . (8.4)
Substituting from (8.3) into (8.4), we have

                                       +
                       u ( x t ) 5 u ( x S ) XSpS(xt- x*),

Hence, the Afriat numbers ut and At can be interpreted as utility levels
and marginal utilities that are consistent with the observed choices.
  The most remarkable implication of Afriat's theorem is that ( 1 ) implies
(4): if there is any locally nonsatiated utility functionat all that rationalizes
                           COMPARATIVE STATICS USING REVEALED PREFERENCE         135


the data, there must exist a continuous, monotonic, and concave utility
function that rationalizes the data. This is similar t o the observation made
in Chapter 6, page 83, where we showed that if there were nonconvex
parts of the input requirement set, no cost minimizer would ever choose to
operate there.
   The same is true for utility maximization. If the underlying utility func-
tion had the "wrong" curvature at some points, we would never observe
choices being made at such points because they wouldn't satisfy the right
second-order conditions. Hence market data do not allow us t o reject the
hypotheses of convexity and monotonicity of preferences.


8.9 Comparative statics using revealed preference

Since GARP is a necessary and sufficient condition for utility maximization,
it must imply conditions analogous to comparative statics results derived
earlier. These include the Slutsky decomposition of a price change into the
income and the substitution effects and the fact that the own substitution
effect is negative.
   Let us begin with the latter result. When we consider finite changes
in a price rather than just infinitesimal changes, there are two possible
definitions of the compensated demand. The first definition is the natural
extension of our earlier definition-namely, the demand for the good in


                                                                          -
question if we change the level of income so as to restore the original level
of utility. That is, the value of the compensated demand for good i when
                                +                    +
prices change from p to p A p is just z , ( p A p , m Am)       +             x,(p+
A p , e ( p + A p , u)), where u is the original level of utility achieved at (p, m).
This notion of compensation is known as the Hicksian compensation.
   The second notion of compensated demand when prices change from p
     +
to p A p is known as the Slutsky compensation. It is the level of
demand that arises when income is changed so as t o make the original
level of consumptzon possible. This is easily described by the following
equations. We want the change in income, Am, necessary to allow for the
old level of consumption, x ( p , m), to be feasible at the new prices, p + A p .
That is
                            +                      +
                           ( p A p ) x ( p , m) = m Am.
Since p x ( p , m) = m, this reduces to A p x ( p , m) = Am.
   The difference between the two notions of compensation is illustrated in
Figure 8.6. The Slutsky notion is directly measurable without knowledge of
the preferences, but Hicksian notion is more convenient for analytic work.
   For infinitesimal changes in price there is no need to distinguish between
the two concepts since they coincide. We can prove this simply by exam-
ining the expenditure function. If the price of good j changes by dp,, we
need t o change expenditure by (de(p, u)/dp,)dp, t o keep utility constant.
          136 CHOICE (Ch. 8)


          If we want to keep the old level of consumption feasible, we need to change
          income by xjdpj. By the derivative property of the expenditure function,
          these two magnitudes are the same.




               Slutsky
          compensation   I
                  Htcks
            compensation




                                                                      GOOD 1


Figure         Hicks a n d Slutsky compensation. Hicks compensation is
8.6            an amount of money that makes the original level of utility
               affordable. Slutsky compensation is an amount of money that
               makes the original consumption bundle achievable.


            Whichever definition you prefer, we can still use revealed preference to
          prove that "the compensated own-price effect is negative." Suppose we
          consider the Hicksian definition. We start with a price vector p and let
                                                                                +
          x = x(p, m) be the demanded bundle. The price vector changes to p A p ,
                                                                    +
          and the compensated demand, therefore, changes to x ( p A p , m Am), +
          where Am is the amount necessary to make x ( p + A p , m + Am) indifferent
          to X(P, m).
                                      +        +
            Since x(p, m) and x ( p A p , m Am) are indifferent to each other,
          neither can be strictly directly revealed preferred to the other. That is, we
      '   musthave
                                          ~x(~,m)<px(p+Ap,rn+Am)
                   (P + AP)X(P + AP, m     + Am) I: ( p + Ap)x(p,m).
          Adding these inequalities together, we have


          Letting Ax = x ( p   + A p , m + Am) - x(p, m), this becomes
                              THE DISCRETE VERSION OF THE SLUTSKY EQUATION     137


Suppose that only one price has changed so that A p = (0,. . . , Api,.. . ,0).
Then this inequality implies that xi must change in the opposite direction.
  We now turn t o the Slutsky definition. We keep the same notation as
before, but now interpret Am as the change in income necessary to make
the old consumption bundle affordable. Since x(p,m ) is thus by hypothesis
                                          +
a feasible level of consumption a t p A p , the bundle actually chosen at
  +
p A p cannot be revealed worse than x ( p ,m ). That is,
                                      + A p , m + Am).
                       P X(P, m) I P x(p
Since ( p+ A p ) x ( p+ A p , m + Am) = ( p + A p ) x ( p ,m ) by construction
of Am, we can subtract this equality from the above inequality to find


just as before.


8.1 0 The discrete version of the Slutsky equation
We turn now to the task of deriving the Slutsky equation. We derived this
equation earlier by differentiating an identity involving Hicksian and Mar-
shallian demands. We start by writing the following arithmetic identity:
 xi ( P   + A P ,m ) - xi ( p ,m ) = xi ( p+ A p , m + Am) - xi ( p ,m )
                                    - [xi( p+ A p , m + Am) - xi ( p+ A p , m ) ] .
Note that this is true by the ordinary rule of algebra.
   Suppose that A p = (0,. . . , Apj,. . . , 0 ) . Then the compensating change
in i n c o m e i n the Slutsky sense-is Am = x j ( p ,m)Apj. If we divide each
side of the above identity by Apj and use the fact that Apj = A m / x j ( p ,m ) ,
we have
      z i ( p + A P , ~- )x i ( p , m ) -       +            +
                                        - xi(p A p , m Am) - xi(p,m)
                   AP~                                AP~

                 -xj(~7m)
                                     +          +                +
                               [ ~ i ( pA p , m Am) - xi(p A p , m ) ]
                                                 Am
Interpreting each of the terms in this expression, we can write
                                                        Axi
                                                    - x.-.
                                         comp          'Am
Note that this last equation is simply a discrete analog of the Slutsky equa-
tion. The term on the left-hand side is how the demand for good i changes
as price j changes. This is decomposed into the substitution effect-how
the demand for good i changes when price j changes and income is also
changed so as t o keep the original level of consumption p o s s i b l e a n d the
income effect-how the demand for good i changes when prices are held
constant but income changes times the demand for good j . The Slutsky
decomposition of a price change is illustrated in Figure 8.7.
         138 CHOICE (Ch. 8)




                       --
                   Substitution Income
                         effect effect
                                                            GOOD 1




Figure         Slutsky decomposition of a price change. First pivot the
8.7            budget line around the original consumption bundle and then
               shift it out to the final choice.


         8.1 1 Recoverability                   O




         Since the revealed preference conditions are a complete set of the restric-
         tions imposed by utility-maximizing behavior, they must contain all of the
         information available about the underlying preferences. It is more-or-less
         obvious how to use the revealed preference relations to determine the pref-
         erences among the observed choices, x t , for t = 1, . . . , T. However, it is less
         obvious to use the revealed preference relations to tell you about preference
         relations between choices that have never been observed.
            This is easiest to see using an example. Figure 8.8 depicts a a single
         observation of choice behavior, (pl, xl). What does this choice imply about
         the indifference curve through a bundle x O? Note that x0 has not been
         previously observed; in particular, we have no data about the prices at
         which x0 would be an optimal choice.
            Let's try to use revealed preference to "bound" the indifference curve
         through x O. First, we observe that x1 is revealed preferred to x O. Assume
         that preferences are convex and monotonic. Then all the bundles on the
         line segment connecting x0 and x1 must be at least as good as x O, and all
         the bundles that lie to the northeast of this bundle are at least as good
         as xO. Call this set of bundles RP(x O ), for "revealed preferred to x O. It
         is not difficult to show that this is the best "inner bound" to the upper
         contour set through the point x O.
            To derive the best outer bound, we must consider all possible budget lines
                                                                  Notes   139




                                           GOOD 1


     Inner and outer bounds. RP is the inner bound t o the                      Figure
     indifference curve through xO;the complement of RW is the                  8.8
     outer bound.

passing through xO. Let RW be the set of all bundles that are revealed
worse than xo for all these budget lines. The bundles in RW are certain
to be worse than x0 no matter what budget line is used.
   The outer bound to the upper contour set at x0 is then defined to be
the complement of this set: NRW = all bundles not in RW. This is the
best outer bound in the sense that any bundle not in this set cannot ever
be revealed preferred t o x0 by a consistent utility-maximizing consumer.
Why? Because by construction, a bundle that is not in NRW(xo)must be
in RW(x O ) in which case it would be revealed worse than xo.
   In the case of a single observed choice, the bounds are not very tight. But
with many choices, the bounds can become quite close together, effectively
trapping the true indifference curve between them. See Figure 8.9 for an
illustrative example. It is worth tracing through the construction of these
bounds to make sure that you understand where they come from. Once we
have constructed the inner and outer bounds for the upper contour sets, ,
we have recovered essentially all the information about preferences that is
contained in the observed demand behavior. Hence, the construction of
RP and RW is analogous t o solving the integrability equations.
   Our construction of RP and RW up until this point has been graphical.
However, it is possible to generalize this analysis t o multiple goods. It turns
out that determining whether one bundle is revealed preferred or revealed
worse than another involves checking to see whether a solution exists to a
particular set of linear inequalities.


Notes

The dual proof of the Slutsky equation given here follows McKenzie (1957)
and Cook (1972). A detailed treatment of integrability may be found
         140 CHOICE (Ch 8)




                                                   GOOD 1


Figure        Inner and outer bounds. When there are several observa-
8.9           tions, the inner and outer bounds can be quite tight.

         in Hurwicz & Uzawa (1971). The idea of revealed preferences is due to
         Samuelson (1948). The approach taken here follows that of Afriat (1967)
         and Varian (1982a). The derivation of the Slutsky equation using revealed
         preference follows Yokoyama (1968).



         Exercises


         8.1. Frank Fisher's expenditure function is e(p, u). His demand function
         for jokes is x, ( p , m ) ,where p is vector of prices and m >> 0 is his income.
         Show that jokes are a normal good for Frank if and only if d2e/ap,au > 0.

         8.2. Calculate the substitution matrix for the Cobb-Douglas demand system
         with two goods. Verify that the diagonal terms are negative and the cross-
         price effects are symmetric.

         8.3. Suppose that a consumer has a linear demand function x = ap+bm+c.
         Write down the differential equation you would need t o solve to find the
         money metric utility function. If you can, solve this differential equation.

         8.4. Suppose that a consumer has a semi-log demand function l n x = ap       +
             +
         b m c. Write down the differential equation you would need to solve to
         find the money metric utility function. If you can, solve this differential
         equation.
                                                               Exercises   141


8.5. Find the demanded bundle for a consumer whose utility function is
                                                    +
             3
u(xl, x2) = xTx2 and her budget constraint is 3x1 4x2 = 100.
                                            1   1
8.6. Use the utility function u(xl, x2) = xfx; and the budget constraint
m = plxl +pzx2 to calculate x(p,m), v(p,m),h(p,u) and e(p,u).

8.7. Extend the previous exercise to the case where u(xl, x2) = (xl -
~ l ) ~ l-( x
            a2)p2
              ~ and check the symmetry of the matrix of substitution



                                                        4
8.8. Repeat the previous exercise using u*(xl,x2) = ln xl     +9 1nx2 and
show that all the previous formulae hold provided u is replaced by eu*.

8.9. Preferences are represented by u = $(x) and a expenditure function, in-
direct utility function and demands are calculated. If the same preferences
are now represented by u* = +($(x)) for a monotone increasing function
+(.), show that e(p, .u) is replaced by e(p, +-l (u*)),v(p, m) by +(v(p, m)),
and h(p, u) by h(p, +-'(u*)). Also, check that the Marshallian demands
x(p, m) axe unaffected.

8.10. Consider a two-period model with Dave's utility given by u(xl, 22)
where x1 represents his consumption during the first period and 2 2 is his
second period's consumption. Dave is endowed with (TI,52) which he could
consume in each period, but he could also trade present consumption for
future consumption and vice versa. Thus, his budget constraint is




where pl and p2 are the first and second period prices respectively.

   (a) Derive the Slutsky equation in this model. (Note that now Dave's
income depends on the value of his endowment which, in turn, depends on
                 +
prices: m = plZl p2z2.)

  (b) Assume that Dave's optimal choice is such that xl < TI. If pl goes
down, will Dave be better off or worse off? What if p2 goes down?

  (c) What is the rate of return on the consumption good?

8.11. Consider a consumer who is demanding goods 1 and 2. When the
price of the goods are (2,4), he demands (1'2). When the prices are (6,3),
he demands (2,l). Nothing else of significance changed. Is this consumer
maximizing utility?
142 CHOICE (Ch. 8)


8.12. Suppose that the indirect utility function takes the form v(p, y) =
f (p)y. What is the form of the expenditure function? What is the form of
the indirect compensation function, p(p; q, y) in terms of the function f (.)
and y?

8.13. The utility function is u(xl, 2 2 ) = min{x2   + 2xl,xl + 2x2).
  (a) Draw the indifference curve for u(xl, xz) = 20. Shade the area where
u(x1, x2) 2 20.
  (b) For what values of pl/p2 will the unique optimum be x l = O?

  (c) For what values of pl/p2 will the unique optimum 2 2 = O?

 (d) If neither x1 nor x2 is equal t o zero, and the optimum is unique,
what must be the value of x1/x2?

8.14. Under current tax law some individuals can save up to $2,000 a year
in an Individual Retirement Account (I.R.A.), a savings vehicle that has
an especially favorable tax treatment. Consider an individual at a specific
point in time who has income Y, which he or she wants t o spend on con-
sumption, C , I.R.A. savings, S1, or ordinary savings S2. Suppose that the
"reduced form" utility function is taken to be:


(This is a reduced form since the parameters are not truly exogenous taste
parameters, but also include the tax treatment of the assets, etc.) The
budget constraint of the consumer is given by:
                              C   + S1 + S 2 = Y,
and the limit that he or she can contribute to the I.R.A. is denoted by L.

  (a) Derive the demand functions for S1and S2for a consumer for whom
the limit L is not binding.

  (b) Derive the demand function for S1 and S2for a consumer for whom
the limit L is binding.

8.15. If leisure is an inferior good, what is the slope of the supply function
of labor?

8.16. A utility-maximizing consumer has strictly convex, strictly monotonic
preferences and consumes two goods, x l and 2 2 , each of which has a price
of 1. He cannot consume negative amounts of either good. The consumer
has an income of m every year. His current level of consumption is (x;, xa),
where x; > 0 and xa > 0. Suppose that next year he will be given a grant
of gl 5 x; which must be spent entirely on good 1. (If he wishes, he can
refuse to accept the grant.)
                                                                  Exercises   143


  (a) True or False? If good 1 is a normal good, then the effect of the grant
on his consumption must be the same as the effect of an unconstrained lump
sum grant of an equal amount. If this is true, prove it. If this is false, prove
that it is false.

   (b) True or False? If good 1 is an inferior good for the above consumer
                        +
at all incomes m > x; x;, then if he is given a grant of gl which must be
spent on good 1, the effect must be the same as an unconstrained grant of
an equal amount. If this is true, prove it. If this is false, show what he will
do if he is given the grant.

  (c) Suppose that the consumer discussed above has homothetic prefer-
ences and is currently consuming x; = 12 and 24 = 36. Draw a graph
with gl on the horizontal axis and the amount of good 1 on the vertical
axis. Use this graph to show the amount of good 1 that the consumer will
demand if his ordinxy income is m = 48 and if he is given a grant of gl
which must be spent on good 1. At what level of gl will this graph have
a kink? (Think for a minute before you answer this. Give a numerical
answer.)
                        CHAPTER             9
                  DEMAND

In this chapter we investigate several topics in demand behavior. Most of
these have to do with special forms of the budget constraint or preferences
that lead to special forms of demand behavior. There are many circum-
stances where such special cases are very convenient for analysis, and it is
useful to understand how they work.


9.1 Endowments in the budget constraint
In our study of consumer behavior we have taken income to be exogenous.
But in more elaborate models of consumer behavior it is necessary to con-
sider how income is generated. The standard way to do this is to think
of the consumer as having some endowment w = (wl,. . . , wk) of various
goods which can be sold at the current market prices p. This gives the
consumer income m = pu which can be used to purchase other goods.
   The utility maximization problem becomes

                                 max u(x)
                                  X


                           such that p x = pw.
                                ENDOWMENTS IN THE BUDGET CONSTRAINT        145


This can be solved by the standard techniques to find a demand function
x(p, p u ) . The n e t d e m a n d for good i is xi - wi. The consumer may have
positive or negative net demands depending on whether he wants more or
less of something than is available in his endowment.
   In this model prices influence the value of what the consumer has to
sell as well as the value of what the consumer wants to sell. This shows up
most clearly in Slutsky's equation, which we now derive. First, differentiate
demand with respect to price:

         dxi(p, W) -
                   - axi(p, W)         1                  axi(~,
                                                            dm
                                                              W) Wj.
            d ~ j       dpj    pu=constant            +




The first term in the right-hand side of this expression is the derivative of
demand with respect to price, holding income fked. The second term is the
derivative of demand with respect to income, times the change in income.
The first term can be expanded using Slutsky's equation. Collecting terms
we have
              dxi (P, W ) - ahi (P, u) dxi (P, W ) (wj - xj).
                                           +



                  d ~ j        ajpj          dm
Now the income effect depends on the net demand for good j rather than
the gross demand.
  Think about the case of a normal good. When the price of the good goes
up, the substitution effect and the income effect both push towards reduced
consumption. But suppose that this consumer is a net seller of this good.
Then his actual income increases and this additional endowment income
effect may actually lead to an increase in consumption of the good.


Labor supply

Suppose that a consumer chooses two goods, consumption and labor. She
also has some nonlabor income m. Let v(c, e) be the utility of consumption
and labor and write the utility maximization problem as

                                max v(c, e)
                                 c,e

                          such that pc = we    + m.
This problem looks a bit different than the problems we have been studying:
labor is probably a "bad" rather than a good, and labor appears on the
right-hand side of the budget constraint.
   However, it is not too hard to change it into a problem that has the
standard form that we have been working with. Let be the maximum
number of hours that the consumer can work and think of L = - C
as being "leisure." The utility function for consumption and leisure is
146 DEMAND (Ch. 9)


u(c,z - C) = v(c, C). Using this we can rewrite the utility maximization
problem as
                       max u(c, Z- C)
                             c,e

                      such that pc       + w(E - C) = WE+ m.
Or, using the definition L = E - C, we write

                               max U(C,L)
                                   c,L
                         such that pc      + wL = WE+ m.
This is essentially the same form that we have seen before. Here the con-
sumer "sells" her endowment of labor at the price w and then buys some
back as leisure.
  Slutsky's equation allows us to calculate how the demand for leisure
changes as the wage rate changes. We have




Note that the term in brackets is nonnegative by definition, and almost
surely positive in practice.' This means that the derivative of leisure de-
mand is the sum of a negative number and a positive number and is inher-
ently ambiguous in sign. In other words, an increase in the wage rate can
lead to either an increase or a decrease in labor supply.
   Essentially an increase in the wage rate tends to increase the supply of
labor since it makes leisure more expensive-you can get more consumption
by working more. But, at the same time, the increase in the wage rate
makes you potentially richer, and this presumably increases your demand
for leisure.


9.2 Homothetic utility functions

A function f : R n + R is homogeneous of degree 1 if f (tx) = tf (x)
for all t > 0. A function f(x) is homothetic if f(x) = g(h(x)) where
g is a strictly increasing function and h is a function which is homoge-
neous of degree 1. See Chapter 26, page 482, for further discussion of the
mathematical properties of such functions.
   Economists often find it useful to assume that utility functions are homo-
geneous or homothetic. In fact, there is little distinction between the two
concepts in utility theory. A homothetic function is simply a monotonic
transformation of a homogeneous function, but utility functions are only

  Except, possibly, at final exam time.
                                             AGGREGATING ACROSS GOODS       147


defined up t o a monotonic transformation. Thus assuming that preferences
can be represented by a homothetic function is equivalent to assuming that
they can be represented by a function that is homogeneous of degree 1. If
a consumer has preferences that can be represented by a homothetic utility
function, economists say that the consumer has h o m o t h e t i c preferences.
   We saw in our discussion of production theory that if a production func-
tion was homogeneous of degree 1, then the cost function could be written
as c(w, y) = c(w)y. It follows from this observation that if the utility
function is homogeneous of degree 1, then the expenditure function can be
written as e(p, u) = e(p)u.
   This in turn implies that the indirect utility function can be written as
v(p, m) = v(p)m. Roy's identity then implies that the demand functions
take the form xi(p, m) = xi(p)m-i.e., they are linear functions of income.
The fact that the "income effects" take this special form is often useful in
demand analysis, as we will see below.


9.3 Aggregating across goods
In many circumstances it is reasonable to model consumer choice by certain
"partial" maximization problems. For example, we may want to model the
consumer's choice of "meat" without distinguishing how much is beef, pork,
lamb, etc. In most empirical work, some kind of aggregation of this sort is
necessary.
   In order t o describe some useful results concerning this kind of separabil-
ity of consumption decisions, we will have to introduce some new notation.
Let us think of partitioning the consumption bundle into two "subbundles"
so that the consumption bundle takes the form (x, z). For example, x could
be the vector of consumptions of different kinds of meat, and z could be
the vector of consumptions of all other goods.
   We partition the price vector analogously into (p, q ) . Here p is the price
vector for the different kinds of meat, and q is the price vector for the other
goods. With this notation the standard utility maximization problem can
be written as
                                 max u(x, z)
                                  x,z
                                                                           (9.1)
                                         +
                           such that p x q z = m.
The problem of interest is under what conditions we can study the demand
problem for the x-goods, say, as a group, without worrying about how
demand is divided among the various components of the x-goods.
   One way to formulate this problem mathematically is as follows. We
would like to be able to construct some scalar q u a n t i t y index, X, and
some scalar price index, P , that are functions of the vector of quantities
and the vector of prices:
148 DEMAND (Ch 9)


  In this expression P is supposed to be some kind of "price index" which
gives the "average price" of the goods, while X is supposed to be a quantity
index that gives the average "amount" of meat consumed. Our hope is that
we can find a way to construct these price and quantity indices so that they
behave like ordinary prices and quantities.
  That is, we hope to find a new utility function U(X, z), which depends
only on the quantity index of x-consumption, that will give us the same
answer as if we solved the entire maximization problem in (9.1). More
formally, consider the problem

                                max U(X, z)                    I

                          such that P X   + qz = m.
The demand function for the quantity index X will be some function
X(P, q, m). We want to know when it will be the case that

                 X ( P , q 1 m) = X ( f (P), q, m) = g(x(p, q, m)).
This requires that we get to the same value of X via two different routes:

1) first aggregate prices using P = f (p) and then maximize U(X, z) subject
                                +
to the budget constraint P X qz = m.

2) first maximize u(x, z) subject to p x     + qz = m and then aggregate
quantities to get X = g(x).

   As it happens there are two situations under which this kind of aggrega-
tion is possible. The first situation, which imposes constraints on the price
movements, is known as Hicksian separability. The second, which im-
poses constraints on the structure of preferences, is known as functional
separability.


Hicksian separability

Suppose that the price vector p is always proportional to some fixed base
price vector    so that p = t p O for some scalar t. If the x-goods are various
kinds of meat, this condition requires that the relative prices of the various
kinds of meat remain constant-they all increase and decrease in the same
proportion.
  Following the general framework described above, let us define the price
and quantity indices for the x-goods by
                                              AGGREGATING ACROSS GOODS     149


We define the indirect utility function associated with these indices as

                    V(P, q,m ) = max u(x, z )
                                      x,z

                                                 +
                             such that p p O x q z = m.

It is straightforward to check that this indirect utility function has all the
usual properties: it is quasiconvex, homogeneous in price and income, etc.
In particular, a straightforward application of the envelope theorem shows
that we can recover the demand function for the x-good by Roy's identity:




This calculation shows that X(P, q, m) is an appropriate quantity index
for the x-goods consumption: we get the same result if we first aggregate
prices and then maximize U(X, z ) as we get if we maximize u(x, z ) and
then aggregate quantities.
  We can solve for the direct utility function that is dual to V(P,q , m) by
the usual calculation:
                       U(X, z ) = min V(P, q, m )
                                  p, q
                            such that P X     + qz = m.
By construction this direct utility function has the property that

                     V(P, q, m) = max U(X, z )
                                      x>z

                             such that P X      + qz = m.
Hence, the price and quantity indices constructed this way behave just like
ordinary prices and quantities.


The two-good model

One common application of Hicksian aggregation is when we are study-
ing the demand for a single good. In this case, think of the z-goods as
being a single good, z , and the x-goods as "all other goods." The actual
maximization problem is then

                               max u(x, z )
                                x,z

                          such that p x     + qz = m.
Suppose that the relative prices of the x-goods remains constant, so that
p = PpO. That is the vector of prices p is some base price vector p0 times
150 DEMAND (Ch. 9)


some price index P . Then Hicksian aggregation says that we can write the
demand function for the z-good as

                                 z = z(P, q, m).

Since this demand function is homogeneous of degree zero, with some abuse
of notation, we can also write



This says that the demand for the z-good depends on the relative price of
the z-good to "all other goods" and income, divided by the price of "all
other goods." In practice, the price index for all other goods is usually
taken to be some standard consumer price index. The demand for the
z-good becomes a function of only two variables: the price of the z-good
relative to the CPI and income relative to the CPI.


Functional separability

The second case in which we can decompose the consumer's consumption
decision is known as the case of functional separability. Let us suppose
that the underlying preference ordering has the property that

                (x, z) + (x', z) if and only if (x, z') + (x', z')

for all consumption bundles x, x', z and z'. This condition says that if x is
preferred to x' for some choices of the other goods, then x is preferred to x'
for all choices of the other goods. Or, even more succinctly, the preferences
over the x-goods are independent of the z-goods.
  If this "independence" property is satisfied and the preferences are locally
nonsatiated, then it can be shown that the utility function for x and z can
be written in the form u(x, z) = U(v(x),z), where U(v, z) is an increasing
function of v. That is, the overall utility from x and z can be written as a
function of the subutility of x, v(x), and the level of consumption of the
z-goods.
  If the utility function can be written in this form, we will say that the
utility function is weakly separable. What does separability imply about
the structure of the utility maximization problem? As usual, we will write
the demand function for the goods as x(p, q, m) and z(p, q, m). Let m, =
px(p, q, m) be the optimal expenditure on the x-goods.
  It turns out that if the overall utility function is weakly separable, the op-
timal choice of the x-goods can be found by solving the following subutility
maximization problem:

                                   max v(x)
                              such that px = m,
                                             AGGREGATING ACROSS GOODS      151


   This means that if we know the expenditure on the x-goods, m, =
px(p, q , m), we can solve the subutility maximization problem t o deter-
mine the optimal choice of the x-goods. In other words, the demand for
the x-goods is only a function of the prices of the x-goods and the expen-
diture on the x-goods m,. The prices of the other goods are only relevant
insofar as they determine the expenditure on the x-goods.
   The proof of this is straightforward. Assume that x ( p , q, m) does not
solve the above problem. Instead, let x' be another value of x that satisfies
the budget constraint and yields strictly greater subutility. Then the bundle
(x', z) would give higher overall utility than (x(p, q, m), z(p, q , m)), which
contradicts the definition of the demand function.
   The demand functions x(p, m,) are sometimes known as conditional
demand functions since they give demand for the x-goods conditional
on the level of expenditure on these goods. Thus, for example, we may
consider the demand for beef as a function of the prices of beef, pork, and
Iamb and the total expenditure on meat.
   Let e(p, v) be the expenditure function for the subutility maximization
problem given in (9.3). This tells us how much expenditure on the x-goods
is necessary at prices p to achieve the subutility v.
   It is not hard to see that we can write the overall maximization problem
of the consumer as
                              max U(v, z)
                               V,Z

                        such that e(p, v)   + q z = m.
This is almost in the form we want: v is a suitable quantity index for the
x-goods, but the price index for the x-goods isn't quite right. We want P
times X , but we have some nonlinear function of p and X = v.
  In order to have a budget constraint that is linear in quantity index,
we need t o assume that subutility function has a special structure. For
example, suppose that the subutility function is homothetic. Then we
know from Chapter 5, page 66, that we can write e(p, v) as e(p)v. Hence,
we can choose our quantity index t o be X = v(x), our price index to be
P = e(p), and our utility function t o be U(X, z). We get the same X if we
solve
                              max U(X, z)
                                x,z
                          such that P X   + qz = m
as if we solve
                                max 'IL(~(x),
                                           2)
                                 x,z

                          such that p x   + q z = m,
and then aggregate using X = v(x).
  In this formulation we can think of the consumption decision as taking
place in two stages: first the consumer considers how much of the com-
posite commodity (e.g., meat) to consume as a function of a price index
         152 DEMAND (Ch. 9 )


         of meat by solving the overall maximization problem; then the consumer
         considers how much beef to consume given the prices of the various sorts
         of meat and the total expenditure on meat, which is the solution to the
         subutility maximization problem. Such a two-stage budgeting process is
         very convenient in applied demand analysis.



         9.4 Aggregating across consumers

         We have studied the properties of a consumer's demand function, x(p, m).
         Now let us consider some collection of i = 1,.. . , n consumers, each of
         whom has a demand function for some k commodities, so that consumer
         i's demand function is a vector xi(p1mi) = (xi (p, mi),. . . ,xk (p, mi)) for
         i = 1,.. . ,n. Note that we have changed our notation slightly: goods
         are now indicated by superscripts while consumers are indicated by sub-
         scripts. The aggregate demand function is defined by X(p, ml, . . . , m,) =
         EL1xi(p, mi). The aggregate demand for good j is denoted by XJ(p,m )
         where m denotes the vector of incomes (ml, . . . , m,).
            The aggregate demand function inherits certain properties of the individ-
         ual demand functions. For example, if the individual demand functions are
         continuous, the aggregate demand function will certainly be continuous.
            Continuity of the individual demand functions is a sufficient but not
         necessary condition for continuity of the aggregate demand functions. For
         example, consider the demand for washing machines. It seems reasonable
         to suppose that most consumers want one and only one washing machine.
         Hence, the demand function for an individual consumer i would look like
         the function depicted in Figure 9.1.




                        1         2   QUANTITY


Figure        Demand for a discrete commodity. At any price greater
9.1           than ri, consumer i demands zero of the good. If the price is
              less than or equal to ri, consumer i will demand one unit of the
              good.
                                      AGGREGATING ACROSS CONSUMERS       153


   The price ri is called the ith consumer's reservation price. If con-
sumers' incomes and tastes vary, we would expect to see several different
reservation prices. The aggregate demand for washing machines is given by
X(p) = number of consumers whose reservation price is at least p. If there
are a lot of consumers with dispersed reservation prices, it would make
sense to think of this as a continuous function: if the price goes up by a
small amount, only a few of the consumers-the "marginal" consumers-
will decide to stop buying the good. Even though their demand changes
discontinuously, the aggregate demand will change only by a small amount.
   What other properties does the aggregate demand function inherit from
the individual demands? Is there an aggregate version of Slutsky's equa-
tion or of the Strong Axiom of Revealed Preference? Unfortunately, the
answer to these questions is no. In fact the aggregate demand function
will in general possess no interesting properties other than homogeneity
and continuity. Hence, the theory of the consumer places no restrictions
on aggregate behavior in general.
   However, in certain cases it may happen that the aggregate behavior may
look as though it were generated by a single "representative" consumer.
Below, we consider a circumstance where this may happen.
   Suppose that all individual consumers' indirect utility functions take the
G o r m a n form:
                                          +
                        vi (P, mi) = ai (P) b ( ~ ) m i .
  Note that the ai(p) term can differ from consumer to consumer, but the
b(p) term is assumed to be identical for all consumers. By Roy's identity
the demand function for good j of consumer i will then take the form



where,

                                       iJpj
                            a: (p) = - -
                                         b(P)




   Note that the marginal propensity to consume good j, dz{(p, mi)/dmi,
is independent of the level of income of any consumer and also constant
across consumers since b(p) is constant across consumers. The aggregate
demand for good j will then take the form
154 DEMAND (Ch. 9)

  This demand function can in fact be generated by a representative con-
sumer. His representative indirect utility function is given by




where M = Cy=l mi.
   The proof is simply to apply Roy's identity to this indirect utility function
and to note that it yields the demand function given in equation (9.4). In
fact it can be shown that the Gorman form is the most general form of
the indirect utility function that will allow for aggregation in the sense
of the representative consumer model. Hence, the Gorman form is not
only suficient for the representative consumer model to hold, but it is also
necessay.
   Although a complete proof of this fact is rather detailed, the following
argument is reasonably convincing. Suppose, for the sake of simplicity, that
there are only two consumers. Then by hypothesis the aggregate demand
for good j can be written as

                 X3(P, m l + m2) r   4(p, ml) + d(p,ma).
  If we first differentiate with respect to ml and then with respect to m2,
we find the following identities




   Hence, the marginal propensity to consume good j must be the same for
all consumers. If we differentiate this expression once more with respect to
ml, we find that

                                 - d2x! (p, ml) -
                      d2Xj(p1M ) -              = 0.
                        dM 2     -     am:

   Thus, consumer 1's demand for good j-and, therefore, consumer 2's
demand-is affine in income. Hence, the demand functions for good j take
                               +
the form 4 (p, mi) = a! (p) @' (p)mi. If this is true for all goods, the
indirect utility function for each consumer must have the Gorman form.
   One special case of a utility function having the Gorman form is a util-
ity function that is homothetic. In this case the indirect utility function
has the form v(p, m) = v(p)m, which is clearly of the Gorman form. An-
other special case is that of a quasilinear utility function. In this case
                +
v(p,m) = v(p) m, which obviously has the Gorman form. Many of the
properties possessed by homothetic and/or quasilinear utility functions are
also possessed by the Gorman form.
                                             INVERSE DEMAND FUNCTIONS      155



9.5 Inverse demand functions

In many applications it is of interest to express demand behavior by de-
scribing prices as a function of quantities. That is, given some vector of
goods x , we would like to find a vector of prices p and an income rn at
which x would be the demanded bundle.
  Since demand functions are homogeneous of degree zero, we can fix in-
come at some given level, and simply determine prices relative to this in-
come level. The most convenient choice is to fix m = 1.
  In this case the first-order conditions for the utility maximization prob
lem are simply




We want to eliminate A from this set of equations.
  To do so, multiply each of the first set of equalities by xi and sum them
over the number of goods to get




Substitute the value of A back into the first expression to find p as function
of x:

                          P~(x)=                                         (9.5)


   Given any vector of demands x, we can use this expression to find the
price vector p(x) which will satisfy the necessary conditions for maximiza-
tion. If the utility function is quasiconcave so that these necessary con-
ditions are indeed sufficient for maximization, then this will give us the
inverse demand relationship.
   What happens if the utility function is not everywhere quasiconcave?
Then there may be some bundles of goods that will not be demanded at
any price; any bundle on a nonconvex part of an indifference curve will be
such a bundle.
   There is a dual version of the above formula for inverse demands that
can be obtained from the expression given in Chapter 8, page 129. The
argument given there shows that the demanded bundle x must minimize
indirect utility over all prices that satisfy the budget constraint. Thus x
156 DEMAND (Ch. 9)

must satisfy the first-order conditions




  Now multiply each of the first equations by pi and sum them to find
that p =  c:=,Fpi.Pi
                          Substituting this back into the first-order condi-
tions, we have an expression for the demanded bundle as a function of the
normalized indirect utility function:




  Note the nice duality: the expression for the direct demand function,
(9.6),and the expression for the indirect demand function (9.5) have the
same form. This expression can also be derived from the definition of the
normalized indirect utility function and Roy's identity.


9.6 Continuity of demand functions

Up until now we have blithely been assuming that the demand functions we
have been analyzing are nicely behaved; that is, that they are continuous
and even differentiable functions. Are these assumptions justifiable?
   Referring to the Theorem of the Maximum in Chapter 27, page 506, we
see that, as long as the demand functions are well defined, they will be
continuous, at least when p >> 0 and m > 0; that is, as long as x(p, m)
is the unique maximizing bundle at prices p and income m, then demand
will vary continuously with p and m.
   If we want to ensure that demand is continuous for all p >> 0 and m > 0,
then we need to ensure that demand is always unique. The condition we
need is that of strict convexity.

Unique demanded bundle. If preferences are strictly convex, then for
each p >> 0 there is a unique bundle x that maximizes u on the consumer's
budget set, B(p, m).

Proof. Suppose x1 and x" both maximize u on B(p,m). Then i x '           +
i x " is also in B(p, m) and is strictly preferred to x' and x", which is a
contradiction.
                                                                Exercises      157


   Loosely speaking, if demand functions are well defined and everywhere
continuous and are derived from preference maximization, then the un-
derlying preferences must be strictly convex. If not, there would be some
point where there was more than one optimal bundle at some set of prices,
as illustrated in Figure 9.2. Note that, in the case depicted in Figure 9.2,
a small change in the price brings about a large change in the demanded
bundles: the demand "function" is discontinuous.




Offer
curve /




                                   GOOD 1                           QUANTITY
              x;     XI
                    Offer curve                      Demand curve
          Discontinuous demand.      Demand is discontinuous due to                  Figure
          nonconvex preferences.                                                     9.2




Notes

See Pollak (1969) for conditional demands. Separability is treated in Black-
orby, Primont & Russell (1979). See Deaton & Muellbauer (1980) for fur-
ther development and applications to consumer demand estimation. The
aggregation section is based on Gorman (1953). See Shafer & Sonnen-
schein (1982) for a survey of positive and negative results in aggregation.


Exercises

9.1. Suppose preferences are homothetic. Show that
158 DEMAND (Ch. 9)


9.2. The demand function for a particular good is x = a     + bp. What are
the associated direct and indirect utility functions?

                                                          + +
9.3. The demand function for a particular good is x = a bp cm. What
are the associated direct and indirect utility functions? (Hint: You have to
know how to solve a linear, nonhomogeneous differential equation to solve
this problem completely. If you can't remember how to do this, just write
down the equation.)

9.4. The demand functions for two goods are




What restrictions on the parameters does the theory imply? What is the
associated money metric utility function?

9.5. What is the direct utility function for the previous problem?

9.6. Let (q, m) be prices and income, and let p = q/m. Use Roy's identity
to derive the formula




9.7. Consider the utility function u(x1,z2,z3) = x;zizi. IS this utility
function (weakly) separable in (22, zg)? What is the subutility function
for the z-good consumption? What are the conditional demands for the
z-goods, given the expenditure on the z-goods, m,?

9.8. Two goods are available, x and y. The consumer's demand function
for the x-good is given by lnx = a - bp + cm,where p is the price of the
x-good relative to the y-good, and m is money income divided by the price
of the y-good.

  (a) What equation would you solve to determine the indirect utility
function that would generate this demand behavior?

  (b) What is the boundary condition for this differential equation?

9.9. A consumer has a utility function u(x, y, z ) = min{x, y )+z. The prices
of the three goods are given by (p,, p,, p,) and the money the consumer
has to spend is given by m.
                                                             Exercises   159


 (a) It turns out that this utility function can be written in the form
U(V(x, y), z). What is the function V(x, y)? What is the function U(V, z)?

  (b) What are the demand functions for the three goods?

  (c) What is the indirect utility function?

9.10. Suppose that there are two goods, XI and 22. Let the price of good
1 be denoted by pl and set the price of good 2 equal to 1. Let income be
denoted by y. A consumer's demand for good 1 is given by




  (a) What is the demand function for good 2?

   (b) What equation would you solve to calculate the income compensa-
tion function that would generate these demand functions?

  (c) What is the income compensation function associated with these
demand functions?

9.11. Consumer 1 has expenditure function el(pl,pn, UI) = u     l   m and
consumer 2 has utility function u ~ ( x I , x=
                                             ~ )4 3 ~ : ~ ; .

  (a) What are the Marshallian (market) demand functions for each of
the goods by each of the consumers? Denote the income of consumer 1 by
ml and the income of consumer 2 by m2.

  (b) For what value(s) of the parameter a will there exist an aggregate
demand function that is independent of the distribution of income?
                     CHAPTER            10
           CONSUMERS'
            SURPLUS

When the economic environment changes a consumer may be made better
off or worse off. Economists often want to measure how consumers are af-
fected by changes in the economic environment, and have developed several
tools to enable them to do this.
   The classicai measure of welfare change examined in elementary courses
is consumer's surplus. However, consumer's surplus is an exact measure of
welfare change only in special circumstances. In this chapter we describe
some more general methods for measuring welfare change. These more
general methods will include consumer's surplus as a special case.


10.1 Compensating and equivalent variations

Let us first consider what an "ideal" measure of welfare change may be. At
the most fundamental level, we would like t o have a measure of the change
in utility resulting from some policy. Suppose that we have two budgets,
(polm O ) and (p', m'), that measure the prices and incomes that a given
consumer would face under two different policy regimes. It is convenient to
                                  COMPENSATING AND EQUIVALENT VARIATIONS         161


    think of (polmO) as being the status quo and (p', m') as being a proposed
    change, although this is not the only interpretation.
      Then the obvious measure of the welfare change involved in moving from
    (pO,m O ) to (p', m') is just the difference in indirect utility:



    If this utility difference is positive, then the policy change is worth doing,
    a t least as far as this consumer is concerned; and if it is negative, the policy
    change is not worth doing.
       This is about the best we can do in general; utility theory is purely ordi-
    nal in nature and there is no unambiguously right way to quantify utility
    changes. However, for some purposes it is convenient to have monetary
    measure of changes in consumer welfare. Perhaps the policy analyst wants
    to have some rough idea of the magnitude of the welfare change for pur-
    poses of establishing priorities. Or perhaps the policy analyst wants to
    compare the benefits and costs accruing to different consumers. In circum-
    stances such as these, it is convenient to choose a "standard" measure of
    utility differences. A reasonable measure to adopt is the (indirect) money
    metric utility function described in Chapter 7, page 109.
        Recall that p(q; p, m) measures how much income the consumer would
    need at prices q t o be as well off as he or she would be facing prices p
    and having income m. That is, p(q; p , m) is defined to be e(q, v(p, m)). If
    we adopt this measure of utility, we find that the above utility difference
    becomes
                               p(q; P', m') - p(q; PO, mO).
      It remains to choose the base prices q . There are two obvious choices:
    we may set q equal to       or to p'. This leads to the following two measures
    for the utility difference:

          EV = p(pO;p', m') - p(PO;         m O ) = p(pO;p', m') - m0
                                                                              (10.1)
          CV = p(pl; p', m') - p(pl;       m O ) = m' - p(pl;     m O ).

      The first measure is known as the equivalent variation. It uses the
    current prices as the base and asks what income change at the current prices
    would be equivalent to the proposed change in terms of its impact on utility.
"
    The second measure is known as the compensating variation. It uses the
    new prices as the base and asks what income change would be necessary to
    compensate the consumer for the price change. (Compensation takes place
    after some change, so the compensating variation uses the after-change
    prices.)
      Both of these numbers are reasonable measures of the welfare effect of a
    price change. Their magnitudes will generally differ because the value of a
    dollar will depend on what the relevant prices are. However, their sign will
162 CONSUMERS' SURPLUS (Ch. 10)


 always be the same since they both measure the same utility differences,
 just using a different utility function. Figure 10.1 depicts an example of
 the equivalent and compensating variations in the two-good case.
    Which measure is the most appropriate depends on the circumstances
 involved and what question you are trying to answer. If you are trying to
 arrange for some compensation scheme at the new prices, then the com-
 pensating variation seems reasonable. However, if you are simply trying to
get a reasonable measure of "willingness to pay," the equivalent variation
 is probably better. This is so for two reasons. First, the equivalent vari-
ation measures the income change a t current prices, and it is much easier
for decision makers to judge the value of a dollar a t current prices than a t
some hypothetical prices. Second, if we are comparing more than one pro-
posed policy change, the compensating variation uses different base prices
for each new policy while the equivalent variation keeps the base prices
fixed a t the status quo. Thus, the equivalent variation is more suitable for
comparisons among a variety of projects.
    Given, then, that we accept the compensating and equivalent variations
as reasonable indicators of utility change, how can we measure them in
practice? This is equivalent t o the question: how can we measure p(q; p, m)
in practice?
    We have already answered this question in our study of integrability the-
ory in Chapter 8. There we investigated how t o recover the preferences rep-
resented by p(q; p, m) by observing the demand behavior x(p,m). Given
any observed demand behavior one can solve the integrability equations, at
least in principle, and derive the associated money metric utility function.
    We have seen in Chapter 8 how to derive the money metric utility func-
tions for several common functional forms for demand functions including
linear, log-linear, semilog, and so on. In principle, we can do similar calcu-
lations for any demand function that satisfies the integrability conditions.
    However, in practice it is usually simpler to make the parametric specifi-
cation in the other direction: first specify a functional form for the indirect
utility function and then derive the form of the demand functions by Roy's
identity. After all, it is usually a lot easier to differentiate a function than
to solve a system of partial differential equations!
   If we specify a parametric form for the indirect utility function, then
estimating the parameters of the associated system of demand equations
immediately gives us the parameters of the underlying utility function. We
can derive the money metric utility function-and the compensating and
equivalent variations-ither algebraically or numerically without much dif-
ficulty once we have the relevant parameters. See Chapter 12 for a more
detailed description of this approach.
   Of course this approach only makes sense if the estimated parameters
satisfy the various restrictions implied by the optimization model. We may
want t o test these restrictions, t o see if they are plausible in our particular
empirical example, and, if so, estimate the parameters subject to these
                                                             CONSUMER'S SURPLUS      163

GOOD 2 1                                 GOOD 2 1




                                GOOD 1                                      GOOD 1
                   A                                             B
       Equivalent variation and compensating variation. In this                            Figure
       diagram p2 = 1 and the price of good 1 decreases from po to p l .                   10.1
       Panel A depicts the equivalent variation in income-how much
       additional money is needed at the original price po to make the
       consumer as well off as she would be facing p l . Panel B depicts
       the compensating variation in incomehow much money should
       be taken away from the consumer to leave him as well off as he
       was facing price po.


restrictions.
  In summary: the compensating and equivalent variations are in fact ob-
servable if the demand functions are observable and if the demand functions
satisfy the conditions implied by utility maximization. The observed de-
mand behavior can be used to construct a measure of welfare change, which
can then be used to analyze policy alternatives.


10.2 Consumer's surplus

The classic tool for measuring welfare changes is consumer's surplus.
If x ( p ) is the demand for some good as a function of its price, then the
consumer's surplus associated with a price movement from p0 to p' is


                              CS =   lo   P'
                                               x ( t ) dt.


This is simply the area to the left of the demand curve between p0 and
p'. It turns out that when the consumer's preferences can be represented
by a quasilinear utility function, consumer's surplus is an exact measure
of welfare change. More precisely, when utility is quasilinear, the compen-
sating variation equals the equivalent variation, and both are equal to the
consumer's surplus integral. For more general forms of the utility function,
164 CONSUMERS' SURPLUS (Ch. 10)


the compensating variation will be different from the equivalent variation
and consumer's surplus will not be an exact measure of welfare change.
However, even when utility is not quasilinear, consumer's surplus may be
a reasonable approximation to more exact measures. We investigate these
ideas further below.


10.3 Quasilinear utility

Suppose that there exists a monotonic transformation of utility that has
the form
                 ~(XO                      +
                       XI,. . . , xk) = 2 0 ~ ( ~ -1.. ,7xk)+
Note that the utility function is linear in one of the goods, but (possibly)
nonlinear in the other goods. For this reason we call this a quasilinear
utility function.
  In this section we will focus on the special case where lc = 1, so that the
utility function takes the form xo -tu(xl), although everything that we say
will work if there are an arbitrary number of goods. We will assume that
u(x1) is a strictly concave function.
  Let us consider the utility maximization problem for this form of utility:

                                max xo
                                X0,Xl
                                         + u(x1)
                         such that XO    + plxl = m.
It is tempting to substitute into the objective function and reduce this
problem to the unconstrained maximization problem

                          max u(x1)
                           21
                                        + m - plxl.
This has the obvious first-order condition

                                  ul(xl) = Pl,

which simply requires that the marginal utility of consumption of good 1
be equal to its price.
  By inspection of the first-order condition, the demand for good 1 is only
a function of the price of good 1, so we can write the demand function
as xl(pl). The demand for good 0 is then determined from the budget
constraint, xo = m - plxl(pl). Substituting these demand functions into
the utility function gives us the indirect utility function
                                                               QUASILINEAR UTILITY   165


  This approach is perfectly fine, but it hides a potential problem. Upon
reflection, it is clear that demand for good 1 can't be independent of income
for all prices and income levels. If income is small enough, the demand for
good 1 must be constrained by income.
  Suppose that we write the utility maximization problem in a way that
explicitly recognizes the nonnegativity constraint on X O :
                                   max u ( x 1 )
                                   X0,Xl
                                                   + xo
                            such that plxl       + xo = m
Now we see that we will get two classes of solutions, depending on whether
xo > 0 or xo = 0. If xo > 0 , we have the solution that we described
above-the demand for good 1 depends only on the price of good 1 and is
independent of income. If xo = 0, then indirect utility will just be given
by uu(mlp1).
   Think of starting the consumer at m = 0 and increasing income by a
small amount. The increment in utility is then u l ( m / p l ) / p l . If this is
larger than 1, then the consumer is better off spending the first dollar of
income on good 1 rather than good 0. We continue to spend on good 1 until
the marginal utility of an extra dollar spent on that good just equals 1; that
is, until the marginal utility of consumption equals price. All additional
income will then be spent on the xo good.
   The quasilinear utility function is often used in applied welfare economics
since it has such a simple demand structure. Demand only depends on
price-at least for large enough levels of income-and there are no income
effects to worry about. This turns out to simplify the analysis of market
equilibrium. You should think of this as modeling a situation where the
demand for a good isn't very sensitive to income. Think of your demand
for paper or pencils: how much would your demand change as your income
changes? Most likely, any increases in income would go into consumption
of other goods.
   Furthermore, with quasilinear utility the integrability problem is very
simple. Since the inverse demand function is given by p l ( x l ) = u l ( x l ) , it
follows that the utility associated with a particular level of consumption
of good 1 can be recovered from the inverse demand curve by a simple
integration:

                 u ( x l )- u ( 0 )=
                                       I"'   ul(t)dt =    1
                                                          21
                                                               p l ( t ) dt.

The total utility from choosing to consume x l will consist of the utility
from the consumption good 1, plus the utility from the consumption of
good 0:
                                               PZ1
166 CONSUMERS'SURPLUS (Ch. 10)

If we disregard the constant m, the expression on the right-hand side of
this equation is simply the area under the demand curve for good 1 minus
the expenditure on good 1. Alternatively, this is the area to the left of the
demand curve.
   Another way to see this is to start with the indirect utility function,
      +
v(p1) m. By Roy's law, x l(PI)= -vl(pl). Integrating this equation, we
have



This is the area to the left of the demand curve down to the price pl,
which is just another way of describing the same area as described in the
last paragraph.


10.4 Quasilinear utility and money metric utility

                                                        +
Suppose that utility takes the quasilinear form u(xl) 20. We have seen
that for such a utility function the demand function xl(p1) will be inde-
pendent of income. We saw above that we could recover an indirect utility
function consistent with this demand function simply by integrating with
respect to pl .
   Of course, any monotonic transformation of this indirect utility function
is also an indirect utility function that describes the consumer's behavior.
If the consumer makes choices that maximize consumer's surplus, then he
also maximizes the square of consumer's surplus.
   We saw above that the money metric utility function was a particu-
larly convenient utility function for many purposes. It turns out that for
quasilinear utility function, the integral of demand is essentially the money
metric utility function.
   This follows simply by writing down the integrability equations and ver-
ifying that consumer's surplus is the solution to these equations. If xl (pl)
is the demand function, the integrability equation is




It can be verified by direct calculation that the solution to these equations
is given by



The expression on the right is simply the consumer's surplus associated
with a price change from p to q plus income.
                              CONSUMER'S SURPLUS AS A N APPROXIMATION     167


  For this form of the money metric utility function the compensating and
equivalent variations take the form

                                    mO) = ~(pO,p')+ m' - m0
         E V = p(pO;p',m') - p(pO;pO,
         CV = p(p';p',ml) -p(p';pO,mO)= ~ ( p O , p '+) m l - m O .

In this special case the compensating and equivalent variations coincide. It
is not hard to see the intuition behind this result. Since the compensation
function is linear in income the value of an extra dollar-the marginal util-
ity of income-is independent of price. Hence the value of a compensating
or equivalent change in income is independent of the prices at which the
value is measured.


10.5 Consumer's surplus as an approximation

We have seen that consumer's surplus is an exact measure of the compen-
sating and equivalent variation only when the utility function is quasilinear.
However, it may be a reasonable approximation in more general circum-
stances.
   For example, consider a situation where only the price of good 1 changes
from p0 to p' and income is fixed at m = m0 = m'. In this case, we can
                                                       --
use the equation (10.1) and the fact that p(p; p, m) m to write




We have written these expressions as a function of p alone, since all other
prices are assumed to be fixed. Letting u0 = v(pO,m) and u' = v(p', m) and
using the definition of the money metric utility function given in Chapter 7,
page 109, we have
                          EV = e(pO,u') - e(pl,u')
                        CV = e(pO,uO)- e(pl,uO).
Finally, using the fact that the Hicksian demand function is the derivative
of the expenditure function, so that h(p, u) 5 aeldp, we can write these
expressions as




   It follows from these expressions that the compensating variation is the
integral of the Hzcksian demand curve associated with the initial level of
         168 CONSUMERS'SURPLUS (Ch. 10)


         utility, and the equivalent variation is the integral of the Hicksian demand
         curve associated with the final level of utility. The correct measure of
         welfare is an integral of a demand c u r v e b u t you have to use the Hicksian
         demand curve rather than the Marshallian demand curve.
            However, we can use (10.2) to derive a useful bound. The Slutsky equa-
         tion tells us that



         If the good in question is a normal good, the derivative of the Hicksian
         demand curve will be larger than the derivative of the Marshallian demand
         curve, as depicted in Figure 10.2.




                                               QUANTITY

Figure        Bounds on consumer's surplus. For a normal good, the
10.2          Hicksian demand curves are steeper than the Marshallian de-
              mand curve. Hence, the area to the left of the Marshallian de-
              mand curve is bounded by the areas under the Hicksian demand
              curves.



           It follows that the area to the left of the Hicksian demand curves will
         bound the area t o the left of the Marshallian demand curve. In the case
         depicted, p0 > p' so all of the areas are positive. It follows that E V >
         consumer's surplus > CV.


         10.6 Aggregation
         The above relationships among compensating variation, equivalent vari-
         ation, and consumer's surplus all hold for a single consumer. Here we
         investigate some issues involving many consumers.
                                                          AGGREGATION     169


  We have seen in Chapter 9, page 153, that aggregate demand for a good
will be a function of price and aggregate income only when the indirect
utility function for agent i has the Gorman form




In this case the aggregate demand function for each good will be derived
from an aggregate indirect utility function that has the form




where M = Cy=lmi.
  We saw above that the indirect utility function associated with quasilin-
ear preferences has a form
                                vi ( P )   + mi.
This is clearly a special case of the Gorman form with b(p) E 1. Hence,
the aggregate indirect utility function that will generate aggregate demand
                  +
is simply V ( p ) M =   zy=l + xy=l
                               vi(p)           mi.
   How does this relate to aggregate consumers' surplus? Reverting to the
case of a single price for simplicity, Roy's law shows that the function vi(p)
is given by



It follows that




That is, the indirect utility function that generates the aggregate demand
function is simply the integral of the aggregate demand function.
  If all consumers have quasilinear utility functions, then the aggregate
demand function will appear to maximize aggregate consumer's surplus.
However, it is not entirely obvious that aggregate consumer's surplus is
appropriate for welfare comparisons. Why should the unweighted sum of a
particular representation of utility be a useful welfare measure? We exam-
ine this issue in Chapter 13, page 225. As it turns out, aggregate consumers'
surplus is the appropriate welfare measure for quasilinear utility, but this
case is rather special. In general, aggregate consumers' surplus will not
be an exact welfare measure. However, it is often used as an approximate
measure of consumer welfare in applied work.
170 CONSUMERS' SURPLUS (Ch. 10)



10.7 Nonpararnetric bounds
We've seen how Roy's identity can be used to calculate the demand function
given a parametric form for indirect utility. Integrability theory can be used
t o calculate a parametric form for the money metric utility function if we
are given a parametric form for the demand function. However, each of
these operations requires that we specify a parametric form for either the
demand function or the indirect utility function.
   It is of interest to ask how far we can go without having to specify a
parametric form. As it turns out it is possible to derive tight nonparametric
bounds on the money metric utility function in an entirely nonparametric
way.
   We've seen in the discussion of recoverability in Chapter 8 that it is pos-
sible t o construct sets of consumption bundles that are "revealed preferred"
or "revealed worse" than a given consumption bundle. These sets can be
thought of as inner and outer bounds to the consumer's preferred set.
   Let NRW(xo) be the set of points "not revealed worse" than xo. This
is just the complement of the set RW(xo). We know from Chapter 8 that
the true preferred set associated with xo, P ( x o ) ,must contain R P ( x o ) and
be contained in the set of points NRW(xo).
   We illustrate this situation in Figure 10.3. In order not t o clutter the
diagram, we've left out many of the budget lines and observed choices and
have only depicted RP(xo) and RW(xo). We've also shown the "true"
indifference curve through xo. By definition, the money metric utility of
xo is defined by
                         m(p, xo) = min p x
                                            X


                                     such that u(x)     > u(xO).
This is the same problem as
                             m(p, xo) = min p x
                                                X

                                      such that x in P ( x o ) .
Define m + ( p , xo) and m- (p,x o ) by
                         m- (p, xo) = min p x
                                            X

                                  such that x in NRW(xo),
and
                           m+(p, xo) = min p x
                                                X

                                     such that x in RP(xo).
Since NRW(xo) > P ( x o ) > R P ( x o ) , it follows from the standard sort of
                                 >                  >
argument that m + ( p , xo) m ( p , x o ) m- (p, x o ) . Hence, the overcom-
p e n s a t i o n function, m + ( p , x o ) , and the u n d e r c o m p e n s a t i o n func-
t i o n , m- (p,xo), bound the true compensation function, m ( p , x o ) .
                                                   GOOD 1


     Bounds on the money metric utility. The true preferred                    Figure
     set, P ( x o ) , contains R P ( x o ) and is contained in NRW(xo).        10.3
     Hence the minimum expenditure over P ( x o ) lies between the
     two bounds, as illustrated.

Notes

The concepts of compensating and equivalent variation and their relation-
ship to consumer's surplus is due t o Hicks (1956). See Willig (1976) for
tighter bounds on consumer's surplus. The nonparametric bounds on the
money metric utility function are due to Varian (1982a).


Exercises

10.1. Suppose that utility is quasilinear. Show that the indirect utility
function is a convex function of prices.

10.2. Ellsworth's utility function is U(x, y) = min{x, y). Ellsworth has
$150 and the price of x and the price of y are both 1. Ellsworth's boss is
thinking of sending him to another town where the price of x is 1 and the
price of y is 2. The boss offers no raise in pay. Ellsworth, who understands
compensating and equivalent variation perfectly, complains bitterly. He
says that although he doesn't mind moving for its own sake and the new
town is just as pleasant as the old, having to move is as bad as a cut in
pay of $A. He also says he wouldn't mind moving if when he moved he got
a raise of $B. What are A and B equal to?
                      CHAPTER             11
         UNCERTAINTY

Until now, we have been concerned with the behavior of a consumer under
conditions of certainty. However, many choices made by consumers take
place under conditions of uncertainty. In this section we explore how the
theory of consumer choice can be used to describe such behavior.


11 .I Lotteries
The first task is to describe the set of choices facing the consumer. We shall
imagine that the choices facing the consumer take the form of lotteries.
A lottery is denoted by p o x @ ( 1 - p) o y. This notation means: "the
consumer receives prize x with probability p and prize y with probability
(1 - p)." The prizes may be money, bundles of goods, or even further
lotteries. Most situations involving behavior under risk can be put into
this lottery framework.
   We will make several assumptions about the consumer's perception of
the lotteries open to him.

  L1. 1 o x @ (1- 1) o y -- x. Getting a prize with probability one is the
  same as getting the prize for certain.
                                                        EXPECTED UTILITY   173

                          -
  L2. p o x @ (1 - p ) o y ( 1 - p) o y @ p o x. The consumer doesn't care
  about the order in which the lottery is described.

  L3. q 0 ( p 0 z @ ( 1 - p ) 0 y ) @ ( 1 - 9 ) 0 y ( 9 ~ )a: @ ( 1 - !?PI Y. A
  consumer's perception of a lottery depends only on the net probabilities
  of receiving the various prizes.

   Assumptions ( L l ) and (L2) appear to be innocuous. Assumption (L3),
sometimes called "reduction of compound lotteries," is somewhat suspect
since there is some evidence to suggest that consumers treat compound
lotteries different than one-shot lotteries. However, we do not pursue this
point here.
   Under these assumptions we can define C,the space of lotteries available
to the consumer. The consumer is assumed to have preferences on this
lottery space: given any two lotteries, he can choose between them. As
usual we will assume the preferences are complete, reflexive, and transitive.
   The fact that lotteries have only two outcomes is not restrictive since
we have allowed the outcomes to be further lotteries. This allows us to
construct lotteries with arbitrary numbers of prizes by compounding two-
prize lotteries. For example, suppose we want to represent a situation with
three prizes x, y, and z where the probability of getting each prize is one
third. By the reduction of compound lotteries, this lottery is equivalent to
the lotterv


According to assumption L3 above, the consumer only cares about the net
probabilities involved, so this is indeed equivalent to the original lottery.


11.2 Expected utility

Under minor additional assumptions, the theorem concerning the existence
of a utility function described in Chapter 7, page 95, may be applied to
show that there exists a continuous utility function u which describes the
consumer's preferences; that is, p o x @ (1- p ) o y > q 0 w @ (1- q ) o z if
and only if



Of course, this utility function is not unique; any monotonic transform
would do as well. Under some additional hypotheses, we can find a par-
ticular monotonic transformation of the utility function that has a very
convenient property, the expected utility property:
174 UNCERTAINN (Ch. 11)


   The expected utility property says that the utility of a lottery is the
expectation of the utility from its prizes. We can compute the utility
of any lottery by taking the utility that would result from each outcome,
multiplying that utility times the probability of occurrence of that outcome,
and then summing over the outcomes. Utility is additively separable over
the outcomeswd linear in the probabilities.
   It should be emphasized that the existence of a utility function is not at
issue; any well-behaved preference ordering can be represented by a utility
function. What is of interest here is the existence of a utility function with
the above convenient property. For that we need these additional axioms:

  U1. {p in [0, l]:pox@(l-p)oy      >  z} and {pin [O,l]:z k pox@(l-p)oy}
  are closed sets for all x,y, and z in L.



   Assumption (Ul) is an assumption of continuity; it is relatively innocu-
ous. Assumption (U2) says that lotteries with indifferent prizes are indif-
ferent. That is, if we are given a lottery po x @ (1- p) o z and we know that
x N y, then we can substitute y for x to construct a lottery po y$ (1 -p) oz
that the consumer regards as being equivalent to the original lottery. This
assumption appears quite plausible.
  In order to avoid some technical details we will make two further as-
sumptions.

  U3. There is some best lottery b and some worst lottery w. For any x
          >
  in L,b x > w.

  ~ 4 A. lottery p o b @ (1 - p) o w is preferred to q 0 b @ (1 - q) w if and
  only if p > q.

   Assumption (U3) is purely for convenience. Assumption (U4) can be
derived from the other axioms. It just says that if one lottery between the
best prize and the worse prize is preferred to another it must be because it
gives higher probability of getting the best prize.
   Under these assumptions we can state the main theorem.

Expected utility theorem. If (C, k ) satisfy the above axioms, there is
a utility function u defined on C that satisfies the expected utility property:


Proof. Define u(b) = 1 and u(w) = 0. TO find the utility of an arbitrary
lottery z, set u(z) = p, where p, is defined by
                           UNIQUENESS OF THE EXPECTED UTILITY FUNCTION     175


In this construction the consumer is indifferent between z and a gamble
between the best and the worst outcomes that gives probability p, of the
best outcome.
  To ensure that this is well defined, we have to check two things.

  (1) Does p, exist? The two sets {p in [O,1]: p o b CB (1 - p) o w ? z )
and {p in [0, 11 : z    p o b @ (1 - p) o w ) are closed and nonempty, and
every point in [O,1] is in one or the other of the two sets. Since the unit
interval is connected, there must be some p in both-but this will just be
the desired p,.

  (2) Is p, unique? Suppose p, and pk are two distinct numbers and
that each satisfies (11.1). Then one must be larger than the other. By
assumption (U4),   the lottery that gives a bigger probability of getting the
best prize cannot be indifferent to one that gives a smaller probability.
Hence, p, is unique and u is well defined.

   We next check that u has the expected utility property. This follows
from some simple substitutions:

   pox@(l      -P)OY

         N1   p o [p, o b @ (1 - p,) 0 W ]@ (1- P) 0 [ ~ y b @ (1 - PY)   W]
         N2       +
              [pp, (1 - p)py]0 b @ [l- PPX - (1 - P)PY] W
                       ) - p)~(y)]O b @ [l - W(X) -
         N 3 [ P ~ (f~(1                                   - P)u(Y)]O

  Substitution 1 uses ( U 2 ) and the definition of p, and p,. Substitution 2
uses (L3),which says only the net probabilities of obtaining b or w matter.
Substitution 3 uses the construction of the utility function.
  It follows from the construction of the utility function that



  Finally, we verify that u is a utility function. Suppose that x + y. Then

               u(x)=p,s~chthatx-p,obCB(l-p,)ow
               u(y) = py such that y - p y o b @(1 - p y ) O W .

             we must have u(x) > u(y).
By axiom (U4),



11.3 Uniqueness of the expected utility function
We have now shown that there exists an expected utility function u : C -+ R.
Of course, any monotonic transformation of u will also be a utility function
176 UNCERTAINTY (Ch. 11)


that describes the consumer's choice behavior. But will such a monotonic
transform preserve the expected utility property? Does the construction
described above characterize expected utility functions in any way?
   It is not hard to see that, if u(.) is an expected utility function describing
                                          +
some consumer, then so is v(.) = au(.) c where a > 0; that is, any affine
transformation of an expected utility function is also an expected utility
function. This is clear since




  It is not much harder to see the converse: that any monotonic transform
of u that has the expected utility property must be an affine transform.
Stated another way:

Uniqueness of expected utility function. An expected utility function
is unique up to an afine transformation.

Proof. According to the above remarks we only have to show that, if a
monotonic transformation preserves the expected utility property, it must
be an affine transformation. Let j : R + R be a monotonic transform of u
that has the expected utility property. Then




But this is equivalent t o the definition of an affine transformation. (See
Chapter 26, page 482.) 1




11.4 Other notations for expected utility

We have proved the expected utility theorem for the case where there are
two outcomes to the lotteries. As indicated earlier, it is straightforward
t o extend this proof t o the case of a finite number of outcomes by using
compound lotteries. If outcome x, is received with probability p, for i =
I , . . . , n, then the expected utility of this lottery is simply
                                                             RISK AVERSION   177


   Subject to some minor technical details, the expected utility theorem
also holds for continuous probability distributions. If p(x) is a probability
density function defined on outcomes x, then the expected utility of this
gamble can be written as




  We can subsume both of these cases by using the expectation operator.
Let X be a random variable that takes on values denoted by x. Then
the utility of X is also a random variable, u(X). The expectation of
this random variable, Eu(X) is simply the expected utility associated with
the lottery X . In the case of a discrete random variable, Eu(X) is given
by (11.2), and in the case of a continuous random variable Eu(X) is given
by (11.3).


1 1.5 Risk aversion
Let us consider the case where the lottery space consists solely of gambles
with money prizes. We know that if the consumer's choice behavior satisfies
the various required axioms, we can find a representation of utility that
has the expected utility property. This means that we can describe the
consumer's behavior over all money gambles if we only know this particular
representation of his utility function for money. For example, to compute
the consumer's expected utility of a gamble p o x @ (1 - p) o y, we just look
at 2 4 2 ) + (1 - P)'~L(Y).
   This construction is illustrated in Figure 11.1 for p =    i.  Notice that in
this example the consumer prefers to get the expected value of the lottery.
That is, the utility of the lottery u(po x @ (1- p) o y) is less than the utility
of the expected value of the lottery, px + (1- p)y. Such behavior is called
risk aversion. A consumer may also be risk loving; in such a case, the
consumer prefers a lottery to its expected value.
   If a consumer is risk averse over some region, the chord drawn between
any two points of the graph of his utility function in this region must lie
below the function. This is equivalent to the mathematical definition of
a concave function. Hence, concavity of the expected utility function is
equivalent to risk aversion.
   It is often convenient to have a measure of risk aversion. Intuitively,
the more concave the expected utility function, the more risk averse the
consumer. Thus, we might think we could measure risk aversion by the
second derivative of the expected utility function. However, this definition
is not invariant to changes in the expected utility function: if we multiply
the expected utility function by 2, the consumer's behavior doesn't change,
but our proposed measure of risk aversion does. However, if we normalize
         178 UNCERTAINTY (Ch. 11)




Figure        Expected utility of a gamble. The expected utility of the
11.1                            +
              gamble is $u(x) $u(y). The utility of the expected value of
              the gamble is u ( i x + i y ) . In the case depicted the utility of the
              expected value is higher than the expected utility of the gamble,
              so the consumer is risk averse.

         the second derivative by dividing by the first, we get a reasonable measure,
         known as the Arrow-Pratt measure of (absolute) risk aversion:




           The following analysis gives further rationale for this measure. Let us
         represent a gamble now by a pair of numbers (xl, 22) where the consumer
         gets X I if some event E occurs and 2 2 if not-E occurs. Then we define
         the consumer's acceptance set to be the set of all gambles the consumer
         would accept a t an initial wealth level w. If the consumer is risk averse,
         the acceptance set will be a convex set. The boundary of this set-the
         set of indifferent gambles-can be given by an implicit function x2(x1), as
         depicted in Figure 11.2.
           Suppose that the consumer's behavior can be described by the maxi-
         mization of expected utility. Then x2(x1) must satisfy the identity:



            The slope of the acceptance set boundary at (0,O) can be found by
         differentiating this identity with respect to xl and evaluating this derivative
         a t x1 = 0:
                                       +
                                pul(w) (1 - p ) u l ( w ) x ~ ( 0=) 0.            (11.4)
         Solving for the slope of the acceptance set, we find
                                                          RISK AVERSION   179




     The acceptance set. This set describes all gambles that                     Figure
     would be accepted by the consumer at his initial level of wealth.           11.2
     If the consumer is risk averse, the acceptance set will be convex.

That is, the slope of the acceptance set at (0,O) gives us the odds. This
gives us a nice way of eliciting probabilities-find the odds a t which a
consumer is just willing to accept a small bet on the event in question.
   Now suppose that we have two consumers who have identical probabili-
ties on the event E. It is natural to say that consumer i is more risk averse
than consumer j if consumer i's acceptance set is contained in consumer
j's acceptance set. This is a global statement about risk aversion for it says
that j will accept any gamble that i will accept. If we limit ourselves to
small gambles, we get a more useful measure.
   It is natural t o say that consumer i is locally more risk averse than
consumer j if i's acceptance set is contained in j's acceptance set in a
neighborhood of the point (0'0). This means that j will accept any small
gamble that i will accept. If the containment is strict, then i will accept
strictly fewer small gambles than j will accept.
   It is not hard to see that consumer i is locally more risk averse than
consumer j if consumer i's acceptance set is "more curved" than consumer
j's acceptance set near the point (0,O). This is useful since we can check
the curvature of the acceptance set by calculating the second derivative of
xz(xl). Differentiating the identity (11.4) once more with respect to x l ,
and evaluating the resulting derivative a t zero, we find



Using the fact that x',(0) = -p/(l - p), we have
180 UNCERTAINTY (Ch. 11)


  This expression is proportional t o the Arrow-Pratt measure of local risk
aversion defined above. We can conclude that an agent j will take more
small gambles than agent i if and only if agent i has a larger Arrow-Pratt
measure of local risk aversion.


EXAMPLE: The demand for insurance

Suppose a consumer initially has monetary wealth W . There is some prob-
ability p that he will lose an amount L-for example, there is some proba-
bility his house will burn down. The consumer can purchase insurance that
will pay him q dollars in the event that he incurs this loss. The amount of
money that he has to pay for q dollars of insurance coverage is n q ; here n
is the premium per dollar of coverage.
   How much coverage will the consumer purchase? We look a t the utility
maximization problem

              max pu(W - L - n q    + q) + ( 1 -P)u(W - ~ 9 ) .
Taking the derivative with respect to q and setting it equal to zero, we find




  If the event occurs, the insurance company receives n q - q dollars. If the
event doesn't occur, the insurance company receives n q dollars. Hence, the
expected profit of the company is



Let us suppose that competition in the insurance industry forces these
profits to zero. This means that



from which it follows that n = p.
   Under the zero-profit assumption the insurance firm charges an actuar-
ially fair premium: the cost of a policy is precisely its expected value, so
that p = n. Inserting this into the first-order conditions for utility maxi-
mization. we find



If the consumer is strictly risk averse so that u U ( W )< 0, then the above
equation implies
                      W - L + ( 1 - n)q* = W - nq*.
                                                  GLOBAL RISK AVERSION   181


from which it follows that L = q*. Thus, the consumer flrill completely
insure himself against the loss L.
   This result depends crucially on the assumption that the consumer can-
not influence the probability of loss. If the consumer's actions do affect
the probability of loss, the insurance firms may only want to offer partial
insurance, so that the consumer will still have an incentive to be careful.
We investigate a model of this sort in Chapter 25, page 455.


11.6 Global risk aversion
The Arrow-Pratt measure seems to be a sensible interpretation of local
risk aversion: one agent is more risk averse than another if he is willing
to accept fewer small gambles. However, in many circumstances we want
a global measure of risk aversion-that is, we want to say that one agent
is more risk averse than another for all levels of wealth. What are natural
ways to express this condition?
   The first plausible way is to formalize the notion that an agent with
utility function A(w) is more risk averse than an agent with utility function
B(w) is to require that




for all levels of wealth w. This simply means that agent A has a higher
degree of risk aversion than agent B everywhere.
   Another sensible way to formalize the notion that agent A is more risk
averse than agent B is to say that agent A's utility function is "more
concave" than agent B's. More precisely, we say that agent A's utility
function is a concave transformation of agent B's; that is, there exists
some increasing, strictly concave function G(.) such that



   A third way to capture the idea that A is more risk averse than B is to
say that A would be willing to pay more to avoid a given risk than B would.
In order to formalize this idea, let 2 be a random variable with expectation
of zero: EZ = 0. Then define ~ ~ ( to2 )  be the maximum amount of wealth
that person A would give up in order to avoid facing the random variable C.
In symbols, this risk premium is



The left-hand side of this expression is the utility from having wealth re-
duced by xA(2)and the right-hand side is the expected utility from facing
the gamble EI. It is natural to say that person A is (globally) more risk
averse than person B if xA(t)> ~ ~ (for     all w.
                                          2 )
182 UNCERTAINTY (Ch. 11)


   It may seem difficult to choose among these three plausible sounding
interpretations of what it might mean for one agent to be "globally more
risk averse" than another. Luckily, it is not necessary to do so: all three
definitions turn out to be equivalent! As one step in the demonstration of
this fact we need the following result, which is of great use in dealing with
expected utility functions.

Jensen's inequality. Let X be a nondegenerate random variable and
f ( X ) be a strictly concave function of this random variable. Then E f ( X ) <
f (EX).
Proof. This is true in general, but is easiest to prove in the case of a
differentiable concave function. Such a function has the property that at
                             +
any point ,: f (z) < f (3) f '(3) (a: - 3).Let X be the expected value of
X and take expectations of each side of this expression, we have


from which it follows that




Pratt's theorem. Let A(w) and B(w) be two differentiable, increas-
ing and concave expected utility functions of wealth. Then the following
properties are equivalent.

1) -A"(w)/A1(w)     > -B"(w)/B1(w) for all w.
2) A(w) = G(B(w)) for some increasing strictly concave function G.
3) xA(Z) > nB(El) for all random variables El with EC = 0.

Proof.

(1) implies (2). Define G ( B ) implicitly by A(w) = G(B(w)). Note that
monotonicity of the utility functions implies that G is well defined-i.e.,
that there is a unique value of G(B) for each value of B. Now differentiate
this definition twice to find




Since A1(w) > 0 and B 1(w) > 0, the first equation establishes G1(B) > 0.
Dividing the second equation by the first gives us
                                                   GLOBAL RISK AVERSION     183

Rearranging gives us

                   GI1( B )Bt(w)= -       BIt(w)
                                  A1'(w)- -
                   G1(B)          A (w) B t (w) < O'
                                   t


where the inequality follows from ( 1 ) . This shows that Grt(B)< 0, as
required.

( 2 ) implies (3). This follows from the following chain of inequalities:

               A(w - 7 r A ) = EA(w + i)= EG(B(w+ Z))
                             < G(EB(w+ i ) )= G(B(w- n ~ ) )
                             = A(w - T B ) .

All of these relationships follow from the definition of the risk premium ex-
cept for the inequality, which follows from Jensen's inequality. Comparing
the first and the last terms, we see that T A > 7 r ~ .

(3) implies (1). Since (3) holds for all zero-mean random variables C, it
must hold for arbitrarily small random variables. Fix an i, and consider
the family of random variables defined by t i for t in [0, 11. Let ~ ( tbe) the
risk premium as a function of t . The second-order Taylor series expansion
of n(t)around t = 0 is given by




  We will calculate the terms in this Taylor series in order to see how ~ ( t )
behaves for small t. The definition of n(t) is

                        A(w - n ( t ) )E EA(w + ti).

It follows from this definition that n(0)= 0. Differentiating the definition
twice with respect to t gives us




   (Some readers may not be familiar with the operation of differentiating
an expectation. But taking an expectation is just another notation for a
sum or an integral, so the same rules apply: the derivative of an expectation
is the expectation of the derivative.)
   Evaluating the first expression when t = 0, we see that nt(0)= 0. Eval-
uating the second expression when t = 0, we see that

                                 EA" (w)i 2 - --
                    7rtt(0)= -       t
                                            - A' (w)c,
                                  A (~)        A1(w) '
184 UNCERTAINTY (Ch. 11)


where a2 is the variance of E. Plugging the derivatives into equation (11.5)
for ~ ( t )
          we, have



This implies that for arbitrarily small values o f t , the risk premium depends
monotonically on the degree of risk aversion, which is what we wanted to
show. I



EXAMPLE: Comparative statics of a simple portfolio problem

Let us use what we have learned t o analyze a simple two-period portfolio
problem involving two assets, one with a risky return and one with a sure
return. Since the rate of return on the risky asset is uncertain, we denote
it by a random variable R.
   Let w be initial wealth, and let a  >0 be the dollar amount invested in
the risky asset. The budget constraint implies that w - a is the amount
invested in the sure asset. For convenience we assume that the sure asset
has a zero rate of return.
   In this case the second-period wealth can be written as


Note that second-period wealth is a random variable since R is a random
variable. The expected utility from investing a in the risky asset can be
written as
                          v(a) = Eu(w aR), +
and the first two derivatives of expected utility with respect to a are




Note that risk aversion implies that v1I(a) is everywhere negative, so the
second-order condition will automatically be satisfied.
   Let us first consider boundary solutions. Evaluating the first derivative
at a = 0, we have vl(0) = EU'(W)R = UI(W)ER.It follows that if ER 5 0,
      <
vl(0) 0, and, given strict risk aversion, vl(a) < 0 for all a > 0. Hence,
a = 0 is optimal if and only if ER 5 0. That is, a risk averter will
choose zero investment in the risky asset if and only if its expected return
is nonpositive.
   Conversely, if ER > 0, it follows that vl(0) = UI(W)ER> 0, so the
individual will generally want t o invest a positive amount in the risky asset.
The optimal investment will satisfy the first-order condition
                                                  GLOBAL RISK AVERSION   185

which simply requires that the expected marginal utility of wealth equals
zero.
  Let us examine the comparative statics of this choice problem. First we
look at how a changes as w changes. Let a ( w ) be the optimal choice of a
as a function of w ; this must identically satisfy the first-order condition



Differentiating with respect to w gives us




As usual, the denominator is negative because of the second-order condi-
tion, so we see that

                    sign a'(w) = sign Eul'(w   + U R ) R.
  The sign of the expression on the right-hand side is not entirely obvious.
However, it turns out that it is determined by the behavior of absolute risk
aversion, r ( w).

Risk aversion. Eu1I(w+ U R ) R is positive, negative, or zero as r ( w ) is
decreasing, increaszng, or constant.

                                                      +
Proof. We show that r l ( w )< 0 implies that EuI1(w U R ) R > 0, since this
is the most reasonable case. The proofs of the other cases are similar.
   Consider first the case where R > 0. In this case we have




which can be rewritten as



Since R > 0,
                   u"(w + ~ R ) >
                                R -r(w)u'(w     + U R ) R.           (11.8)
  Now consider the case where R < 0. Examining (11.7), we see that
decreasing absolute risk aversion implies
186 UNCERTAINTY (Ch. 11)


Since R < 0, we have


Comparing this to equation (11.8) we see that (11.8) must hold both for
R > 0 and R < 0. Hence, taking expectation over all values of R, we have


where the last equality follows from the first-order conditions.

   The lemma gives our result: the investment in the risky asset will be
increasing, constant, or decreasing in wealth as risk aversion is decreasing,
constant, or increasing in wealth.
   We turn now to investigating how the demand for the risky asset changes
as the probability distribution of its return changes. One way to parame-
                                                             +
terize shifts in the random rate of return is to write (1 h ) ~   where h is
a shift variable. When h = 0 we have the original random variable; if h is
positive, this means that every realized return is h percent larger.
                      +
   Replacing R by (1 h ) in~equation (11.6) and dividing both sides of
                      +
the expression by (1 h) g'ives us


We could proceed to differentiate this expression with respect to h and sign
the result, but there is a much easier way to see what happens to a as h
changes. Let a(h) be the demand for the risky asset as a function of h. I
claim that


The proof is simply to substitute this formula into the first-order condition
(11.9).
   Intuitively, if the random variable scales up by 1 + h, the consumer just
                                +
reduces his holdings by 1/(1 h) and restores exactly the same pattern
of returns that he had before the random variable shifted. This kind of
linear shift in the random variable can be perfectly offset by a change in
the consumer's portfolio.
   A more interesting shift in the random variable is a mean-preserving
spread that increases the variance of R but leaves the mean constant. One
way to parameterize such a change is to write R + h ( - ~X). The expected
value of this random variable is    z,but the variance is (1 + h ) 2 a i , so an
increase in h leaves the mean fixed but increases the variance.
                                           +
   We can also write this expression as (1 h ) - ~h z . This shows that this
sort of mean-preserving spread can be viewed as multiplying the random
               +
variable by 1 h and then subtracting off h x . According to our earlier
                                                  +
results, multiplying the random variable by 1 h scales demand back by
 +
1 h, and subtracting wealth reduces demand even more, assuming that
absolute risk aversion is decreasing. Hence, a mean preserving spread of
this sort reduces investment in the risky asset more than proportionally.
                                                   GLOBAL RISK AVERSION   187



EXAMPLE: Asset pricing

Suppose now that there are many risky assets and one certain asset. Each
of the risky assets has a random total return R, for z = 1,.. . , n and the
safe asset has a total return &. (The total return, R, is one plus the rate of
return; in the last section we used R for the rate of return.) The consumer
initially has wealth w and chooses to invest a fraction of his wealth x, in
asset z for z = 0 , . . . , n. Thus, the wealth of the consumer in the second
period-when the random returns are realized-will be given by




We assume that the consumer wants to choose (x,) to maximize the ex-
pected utility of random wealth W .
  The budget constraint for this problem is that C:="=,%    = 1. Since x, is
the fraction of the consumer's wealth invested in asset z, then the sum of
the fractions over all the available assets must be 1. We can also write this
budget constraint as
                                     n




so that xo = 1 - C:=l xz. Substituting this expression into (11.10) and
rearranging, we have




  With this rearrangement of the budget constraint, we now have an un-
constrained maximization problem for X I , .. . , xn.




Differentiating with respect to x, we have the first-order conditions
188 UNCERTAINTY (Ch. 11)


for i = 1,. . . , n. Note that this is essentially the same expression as derived
in the preceding section.
   This can also be written as



Using the covariance identity for random variables, cov(X, Y) = E X Y -
E X E Y , we can transform this expression to



which can be rearranged to yield




   This equation says that the expected return on any asset can be written
as the sum of two components: the risk-free return plus the risk premium.
The risk premium depends on the covariance between the marginal utility
of wealth and the return of the asset. (Note that this is a different con-
cept of risk premium than that discussed in the proof of Pratt's theorem.
Unfortunately, the same term is applied to both concepts.)
   Consider an asset whose return is positively correlated with wealth. Since
risk aversion implies that the marginal utility of wealth decreases with
wealth, it follows that such an asset will be negatively correlated with
marginal utility. Hence, such an asset must have an expected return that
is higher than the risk-free rate, in order to compensate for its risk.
   On the other hand, an asset that is negatively correlated with wealth
will have an expected return that is less than the risk-free rate. Intuitively,
an asset that is negatively correlated with wealth is an asset that is espe-
cially valuable for reducing risk, and therefore people are willing to sacrifice
expected returns in order to hold such an asset.


11.7 Relative risk aversion

Consider a consumer with wealth w and suppose that she is offered gambles
of the form: with probability p she will receive x percent of her current
wealth; with probability (1 - p) she will receive y percent of her current
wealth. If the consumer evaluates lotteries using expected utility, the utility
of this lottery will be



Note that this multiplicative gamble has a different structure than the
additive gambles analyzed above. Nevertheless, relative gambles of this sort
                                                  RELATIVE RISK AVERSION   189


often arise in economic problems. For example, the return on investments
is usually stated relative to the level of investment.
   Just as before we can ask when one consumer will accept more small
relative gambles than another a t a given wealth level. Going through the
same sort of analysis used above, we find that the appropriate measure
turns out t o be the Arrow-Pratt measure of relative risk aversion:
                                        ul1(w)w
                               p    =      - .
                                         ul(w)
   It is reasonable t o ask how absolute and relative risk aversions might
vary with wealth. It is quite plausible t o assume that absolute risk aversion
decreases with wealth: as you become more wealthy you would be willing
to accept more gambles expressed in absolute dollars. The behavior of
relative risk aversion is more problematic; as your wealth increases would
you be more or less willing to risk losing a specific fraction of it? Assuming
constant relative risk aversion is probably not too bad an assumption, at
least for small changes in wealth.


EXAMPLE: Mean-variance utility
In general the expected utility of a gamble depends on the entire proba-
bility distribution of the outcomes. However, in some circumstances the
expected utility of a gamble will only depend on certain summary statistics
of the distribution. The most common example of this is a mean-variance
utility function.
   For example, suppose that the expected utility function is quadratic, so
that u(w)= w - bw2.Then expected utility is


Hence, the expected utility of a gamble is only a function of the mean and
variance of wealth.
   Unfortunately, the quadratic utility function has some undesirable prop-
erties: it is a decreasing function of wealth in some ranges, and it exhibits
increasing absolute risk aversion.
   A more useful case when mean-variance analysis is justified is the case
when wealth is Normally distributed. It is well-known that the mean and
variance completely characterize a Normal random variable; hence, choice
among Normally distributed random variables reduces to a comparison on
their means and variances.
   One particular case that is of special interest is when the consumer has a
utility function of the form u(w)= -e-'".      It can be shown that this util-
ity function exhibits constant absolute risk aversion. Furthermore, when
wealth is Normally distributed
190 UNCERTAINTY (Ch. 1 1 )


(To do the integration, either complete the square or else note that this
is essentially the calculation that one does to find the moment generat-
ing function for the Normal distribution.) Note that expected utility is
increasing in G - rc;/2. This means that we can take a monotonic trans-
formation of expected utility and evaluate distributions of wealth using the
                        , = - 5 ~ ; . This utility function has the conve-
utility function u ( ~CJ;)
nient property that it is linear in the mean and variance of wealth.


11.8 State dependent utility
In our original analysis of choice under uncertainty, the prizes were simply
abstract bundles of goods; later we specialized to lotteries with only mon-
etary outcomes. However, this is not as innocuous as it appears. After all,
the value of a dollar depends on the prevailing prices; a complete descrip-
tion of the outcome of a dollar gamble should include not only the amount
of money available in each outcome but also the prevailing prices in each
outcome.
   More generally, the usefulness of a good often depends on the circum-
stances or state of nature in which it becomes available. An umbrella
when it is raining may appear very different to a consumer than an umbrella
when it is not raining. These examples show that in some choice problems
it is important to distinguish goods by the state of nature in which they
are available.
   For example, suppose that there are two states of nature, hot and cold,
which we index by h and c. Let xh be the amount of ice cream deliv-
ered when it is hot and x, the amount delivered when it is cold. Then if
the probability of hot weather is p, we may write a particular lottery as
          +
pu(h, xh) (1- p)u(c, 2,). Here the bundle of goods that is delivered in
one state is "hot weather and xh units of ice cream," and "cold weather
and x, units of ice cream" in the other state.
   A more serious example involves health insurance. The value of a dollar
may well depend on one's health-how much would a million dollars be
worth to you if you were in a coma? In this case we might well write
the utility function as u(h,mh) where h is an indicator of health and m
is some amount of money. These are all examples of state-dependent
utility functions. This simply means that the preferences among the
goods under consideration depend on the state of nature under which they
become available.


11.9 Subjective probability theory
In the discussion of expected utility theory we have been rather vague about
the exact nature of the "probabilities" that enter the expected utility func-
tion. The most straightforward interpretation is that they are "objective"
                                            SUBJECTIVEPROBABILITY THEORY     191


probabilities-such as probabilities calculated on the basis of some observed
frequencies. Unfortunately, most interesting choice problems involve sub-
jective probabilities: a given agent's perception of the likelihood of some
event occurring.
   In the case of expected utility theory, we asked what axioms about a
person's choice behavior would imply the existence of an expected utility
function that would represent that behavior. Similarly, we can ask what
axioms about a person's choice behavior can be used t o infer the existence
of subjective probabilities; i.e., that the person's choice behavior can be
viewed as if he were evaluating gambles according t o their expected utility
with respect to some subjective probability measures.
   As it happens, such sets of axioms exist and are reasonably plausible.
Subjective probabilities can be constructed in a way similar to the manner
with which the expected utility function was constructed. Recall that the
utility of some gamble x was chosen to be that number u(x) such that



   Suppose that we are trying to ascertain an individual's subjective proba-
bility that it will rain on a certain date. Then we can ask a t what probabil-
ity p will the individual be indifferent between the gamble p o b $ (1 - p) o w
and the gamble "Receive b if it rains and w otherwise."
   More formally, let E be some event, and let p ( E ) stand for the (subjec-
tive) probability that E will occur. We define the subjective probability
that E occurs by the number p ( E ) that satisfies

    p(E) 0 b $ (1 - p(E)) 0 w   -   receive b if E occurs and w otherwise.

   It can be shown that under certain regularity assumptions the proba-
bilities defined in this way have all of the properties of ordinary objective
probabilities. In particular, they obey the usual rules for manipulation
of conditional probabilities. This has a number of useful implications for
economic behavior.
   We will briefly explore one such implication. Suppose that p(H) is an
individual's subjective probability that a particular hypothesis is true, and
that E is an event that is offered as evidence that H is true. How should a
rational economic agent adjust his probability belief about H in light of the
evidence E ? That is, what is the probability of H being true, conditional
on observing the evidence E?
   We can write the joint probability of observing E and H being true as



Rearranging the right-hand sides of this equation,
192 UNCERTAINTY (Ch. 1 1 )


This is a form of Bayes' law which relates the prior probability p ( H ) ,
the probability that the hypothesis is true before observing the evidence,
t o the posterior probability, the probability that the hypothesis is true
after observing the evidence.
   Bayes' law follows directly from simple manipulations of conditional
probabilities. If an individual's behavior satisfies restrictions sufficient to
ensure the existence of subjective probabilities, those probabilities must
satisfy Bayes' law. Bayes' law is important since it shows how a rational
individual should update his probabilities in the light of evidence, and hence
serves as the basis for most models of rational learning behavior.
   Thus, both the utility function and the subjective probabilities can be
constructed from observed choice behavior, as long as the observed choice
behavior follows certain intuitively plausible axioms. However, it should
be emphasized that although the axioms are intuitively plausible it does
not follow that they are accurate descriptions of how individuals actually
behave. That determination must be based on empirical evidence.            .

EXAMPLE: The Allais paradox and the Ellsberg paradox

Expected utility theory and subjective probability theory were motivated
by considerations of rationality. The axioms underlying expected utility
theory seem plausible, as does the construction that we used for subjective
probabilities.
  Unfortunately, real-life individual behavior appears to systematically vi-
olate some of the axioms. Here we present two famous examples.


The Allais paradox

You are asked to choose between the following two gambles:

G a m b l e A. A 100 percent chance of receiving 1 million.

G a m b l e B. A 10 percent chance of 5 million, an 89 percent chance of 1
million, and a 1 percent chance of nothing.

Before you read any further pick one of these gambles, and write it down.
Now consider the following two gambles.

G a m b l e C. An 11 percent chance of 1 million, and an 89 percent chance
of nothing.

G a m b l e D. A 10 percent chance of 5 million, and a 90 percent chance of
nothing.
                                           SUBJECTIVEPROBABILITY THEORY   193


  Again, please pick one of these two gambles as your preferred choice and
write it down.
  Many people prefer A to B and D to C. However, these choices violate
the expected utility axioms! To see this, simply write the expected utility
relationship implied by A k B:


                                                       \
Rearranging this expression gives



and adding .89u(0) to each side yields '



It follows that gamble C must be preferred to gamble D by an expected
utility maximizer.


The Ellsberg paradox

The Ellsberg paradox concerns subjective probability theory. You are told
that an urn contains 300 balls. One hundred of the balls are red and 200
are either blue or green.

Gamble A. You receive $1,000 if the ball is red.

Gamble B. You receive $1,000 if the ball is blue.

Write down which of these two gambles you prefer. Now consider the
following two gambles:

Gamble C. You receive $1,000 if the ball is not red.

Gamble D. You receive $1,000 if the ball is not blue.

  It is common for people to strictly prefer A to B and C to D. But these
preferences violate standard subjective probability theory. To see why, let
R be the event that the ball is red, and 7 R be the event that the ball is not
red, and define B and T B accordingly. By ordinary rules of probability,
194 UNCERTAINTY (Ch. 11)


 Normalize u(0) = 0 for convenience. Then if A is preferred to B, we
must have p(R)u(1000) > p(B)u(1000), from which it follows that



If C is preferred to D, we must have p(~R)u(1000)> p(~B)u(1000),from
which it follows that
                             p(lR) > p(-.B).                 (11.14)
However, it is clear that expressions (11.12)' (11.13), and (11.14) are in-
consistent.
  The Ellsberg paradox seems to be due to the fact that people think that
betting for or against R is "safer" than betting for or against "blue."
   Opinions differ about the importance of the Allais paradox and the Ells-
berg paradox. Some economists think that these anomalies require new
models to describe people's behavior. Others think that these paradoxes
are akin to LLopti~al illusions." Even though people are poor at judging
distances under some circumstances doesn't mean that we need to invent
a new concept of distance.


Notes

The expected utility function is due to Neumann & Morgenstern (1944).
The treatment here follows Herstein & Milnor (1953). The measures of risk
aversion are due to Arrow (1970) and Pratt (1964). The treatment here
follows Yaari (1969). A description of recent work on generalizations of ex-
pected utility theory may be found in Machina (1982). Our brief treatment
of subjective probability is based on Anscombe & Aumann (1963).


Exercises

11.1. Show that the willingness-tc-pay to avoid a small gamble with vari-
ance v is approximately r(w)v/2.

11.2. What will the form of the expected utility function be if risk aversion
is constant? What if relative risk aversion is constant?

11.3. For what form of expected utility function will the investment in a
risky asset be independent of wealth?

11.4. Consider the case of a quadratic expected utility function. Show that
at some level of wealth marginal utility is decreasing. More importantly,
show that absolute risk aversion is increasing at any level of wealth.
                                                                 Exercises   195


11.5. A coin has probability p of landing heads. You are offered a bet in
which you will be paid $21 if the first head occurs on the j t h flip.

  (a) What is the expected value of this bet when p = 1/2?

  (b) Suppose that your expected utility function is u(x) = lnx. Express
the utility of this game t o you as a sum.

   (c) Evaluate the sum. (This requires knowledge of a few summation
formulas.)

  (d) Let wo be the amount of money that would give you the same utility
you would have if you played this game. Solve for wo.

11.6. Esperanza has been an expected utility maximizer ever since she
was five years old. As a result of the strict education she received a t an
obscure British boarding school, her utility function u is strictly increasing
and strictly concave. Now, at the age of thirty-something, Esperanza is
evaluating an asset with stochastic outcome R which is normally distributed
with mean p and variance a 2 . Thus, its density function is given by

                              1            1       r-p
                    f    =P            -       (   )   2   }




  (a) Show that Esperanza's expected utility from R is a function of p
and a 2 alone. Thus, show that E[u(R)]= 4 ( p , a 2 ) .

  (b) Show that #(.) is increasing in p.

  (c) Show that q5(.) is decreasing in a 2 .

11.7. Let R1 and R2 be the random returns on two assets. Assume that
R1 and R2 are independently and identically distributed. Show that an
expected utility maximizer will divide her wealth between both assets pro-
vided she is risk averse; and invest all her wealth in one of the assets if
she's risk loving.

11.8. Suppose that a consumer faces two risks and only one of them is to
be eliminated. Let W = wl with probability p and 6 = w2 with probability
1 - p. Let E = 0 if W = w2. If W = w1, t = E with probability 112 and
E = - E with probability 112. Now, define a risk premium xu for P to satisfy:

                        E[u(G - nu)]= E[u(W         + P)].                   (*)
196 UNCERTAINTY (Ch. 11)


  (a) Show that if 6 is sufficiently small,




[Hint: Take Taylor expansions of appropriate orders on both sides of (*)-
first-order on the left and second-order on the right.]
 (b) Let U(W)= -eVaw and v(w) = -e-bw. Compute the Arrow-Pratt
measure for u and v.

  (c) Suppose that a > b. Show that if p < 1 then there exists a value
wl - w2 large enough to make n, > nu. What does this suggest about
the usefulness of the Arrow-Pratt measure for problems where risk is only
partially reduced?
11.9. A person has an expected utility function of the form u(w) = f i .
He initially has wealth of $4. He has a lottery ticket that will be worth
$12 with probability 112 and will be worth $0 with probability 112. What
is his expected utility? What is the lowest price p at which he would part
with the ticket?

11.10. A consumer has an expected utility function given by u(w) = lnw.
He is offered the opportunity to bet on the flip of a coin that has a proba-
                                                           +
bility T of coming up heads. If he bets $x, he will have w x if head comes
up and w - x if tails comes up. Solve for the optimal x as a function of n.
What is his optimal choice of x when n = 1/2?
11.11. A consumer has an expected utility function of the form u(w) =
-l/w. He is offered a gamble which gives him a wealth of wl with prob-
ability p and wz with probability 1 - p. What wealth would he need now
to be just indifferent between keeping his current wealth or accepting this
gamble?

11.12. Consider an individual who is concerned about monetary payoffs in
the states of nature s = 1,. . . , S which may occur next period. Denote the
dollar payoff in state s by x, and the probability that state s will occur by
p,. The individual is assumed to choose x = (xl,.. . , xs) so as to maximize
the discounted expected value of the payoff. The discount factor is denoted
by a; i.e., a = 1/(1+ r ) , where, r is the discount rate. The set of feasible
payoffs is denoted by X, which we assume to be nonempty.

  (a) Write down the individual's maximization problem.

  (b) Define v(p, a ) to be the maximum discounted expected value that
the individual can achieve if the probabilities are p = (p,, . . .ps) and the
discount factor is a. Show that v(p,a) is homogeneous of degree 1 in a .
(Hint: Does v(p, a ) look like something you have seen before?)
                                                               Exercises   197


  (c) Show that v(p, a ) is a convex function of p.

  (d) Suppose that you can observe an arbitrarily large number of optimal
choices of x for various values of p and a. What properties must the set X
possess in order for it to be recoverable from the observed choice behavior?
                    CHAPTER            12
    ECONOMETRICS


In the previous chapters we have examined various models of optimizing
behavior. Here we examine how one can use the theoretical insights devel-
oped in those chapters to help estimate relationships that may have been
generated by optimizing behavior.
  Theoretical analysis and econometric analysis can interact in several
ways. First, theory can be used to derive hypotheses that can be tested
econometrically. Second, the theory can suggest ways to construct bet-
ter estimates of model parameters. Third, the theory helps to specify
the structural relationships in the model in a way that can lead to more
appropriate estimation. Finally, the theory helps to specify appropriate
functional forms to estimate.


12.1 The optimization hypothesis

We have seen that the model of optimizing choice imposes certain restric-
tions on observable behavior. These restrictions can be expressed in a
number of ways: 1) the algebraic relationships such as WAPM, WACM,
GARP, etc.; 2) the derivative relationships such as the conditions that
                        NONPARAMETRIC TESTING FOR MAXIMIZING BEHAVIOR          199


certain substitution matrices must be symmetric and positive or negative
semidefinite; 3) the dual relationships such as the fact that profits must be
a convex function of prices.
   The conditions implied by the maximization models are important for
at least two reasons. First, they allow us to test the model of maximizing
behavior. If the data don't satisfy the restrictions implied by the particular
optimization model we are using, then we generally would not want to use
that model t o describe the observed behavior.
   Second, the conditions allow us t o estimate the parameters of our model
more precisely. If we find that the theoretical restrictions imposed by o p
timization are not rejected in some particular data set, we may want to
re-estimate our model in a way that requires the estimates t o satisfy the
restrictions implied by optimization.
   Suppose, for example, we have an optimizing model that implies that
some parameter a equals zero. First, we might want to test this restriction,
and see if the estimated value of a is significantly different from zero. If the
parameter is not significantly different from zero, we may want t o accept the
hypothesis that a = 0 and re-estimate the model imposing this hypothesis.
If the hypothesis is true, the second set of estimates of the other parameters
in the system will generally be more efficient estimates.
   Of course, if the hypothesis is false, the re-estimation procedure will
not be appropriate. Our faith in the resulting estimates depends to some
degree on how much faith we place in the results of the initial test of the
optimization restrictions.


12.2 Nonparametric testing for maximizing behavior

If we are given a set of observations on firm choices, we can test the WAPM
and/or WACM inequalities described earlier directly. If we have data on
consumer choices, the conditions like GARP are only slightly more difficult
to check. These conditions give us a definitive answer as t o whether the
data in question could have been generated by maximizing behavior.
   These inequality conditions are easy to check; we simply see if the data
in question satisfy certain inequality relationships. If we observe a violation
of one of the inequalities, then we can reject the maximizing model. Sup-
pose, for example, that we have several observations on a firm's choice of
net outputs at various price vectors: ( p t , y t ) , for t = 1,.. . , T. We may be
interested in the hypothesis that this firm is maximizing profits in a com-
petitive environment. We know that profit maximization implies WAPM:
ptyt  >  ptyS for all s and t. Testing WAPM simply involves checking to
see whether these T2 inequalities are satisfied.
   In this framework a single observation where p t y t < p t y S is enough
to reject the profit-maximizing model. But perhaps this is too strong.
Presumably what we really care about is not whether a particular firm is
200 ECONOMETRICS (Ch. 12)


exactly maximizing profits, but rather whether its behavior is reasonably
well-described by the model of profit maximization. Typically, we want to
know not only whether the firm fails to maximize, but by how much the firm
fails t o maximize. If it only fails to maximize by a small amount, we may
still be willing to accept the theory that the firm is "almost" maximizing
profits.
   There is a very natural measure of the magnitude of the violation of
WAPM, namely the "residuals" Rt = max s {p ty s -ptyt). The residual Rt
measures how much more profit the firm could have had at observation t
if it had made a different choice. It provides a reasonable measurement of
the departure from profit-maximizing behavior. If the average value of Rt
is small, then "almost" optimizing behavior may not be a bad model for
this firm's behavior.


12.3 Parametric tests of maximizing behavior
The nonparametric tests described above are "exact" tests of optimization:
they are necessary and sufficient conditions for data to be consistent with
the optimization model. However, economists are often interested in the
question of whether a particular parametric form is a good approximation
to some underlying production function or utility function.
  One way to answer this question is to use regression analysis, or more
elaborate statistical techniques, t o estimate the parameters of a functional
form and see if we satisfy the restrictions imposed by the maximizing model.
For example, suppose that we observe prices and choices for k goods. The
Cobb-Douglas utility function implies that the demand for good i is a linear
function of income divided by price: xi = aim/pi for i = 1 , . . . , k.
  It is unlikely that observed demand data will be exactly linear in m/pi,
so we may want t o allow for an error term to represent measurement error,
misspecification, left-out variables, and so on. Using ei for the error term
on the i th equation, we have the regression model



  It follows from the maximizing model that ~ f = ai, = 1. We can estimate
the parameters of the model described by (12.1) and see if they satisfy this
restriction. If they do, this is some evidence in favor of the Cobb-Douglas
model; if the estimated parameters don't satisfy this restriction, this is
evidence against the Cobb-Douglas parametric form.
  If we use more elaborate functional forms, we get a more elaborate set
of testable restrictions. We know from our study of consumer behavior
that the fundamental observable restriction imposed by maximization is
that the matrix of substitution terms must be negative semidefinite. This
condition imposes a number of cross-equation restrictions that can be tested
by standard hypothesis testing procedures.
                                 GOODNESS-OF-FIT FOR OPTIMIZING MODELS         201



12.4 Imposing optimization restrictions
If our statistical tests do not reject some particular parametric restrictions,
we may want to re-estimate the model imposing those restrictions on the
estimation procedure. To continue with our above example, the Cobb-
Douglas demand system described in (12.1) implies that          xtxl   ai = 1. We
may want to estimate the set of parameters      ( a i )imposing this restriction as
a maintained hypothesis. If the hypothesis is true, the resulting estimates
will generally be better that the unconstrained estimates.
   The optimization model often imposes restrictions on the error term as
well as on the parameters. For example, another restriction imposed by the
theoretical model is that c:=, p i s i ( p , m) = m. Generally, the observed
choices will satisfy the restriction ~ t =pizi , = m by construction. If this
is so, equations (12.1) imply that




If we estimate our system subject to the constraint that x i k= l ai = 1, we
also would want to impose the restriction       zFzl
                                                pici = 0. That is, the k
error terms must be orthogonal to the price vector.


12.5 Goodness-of-fit for optimizing models
The parametric tests briefly described in the last section describe how one
can statistically test the hypothesis that observed choices were generated by
maximization of some particular parametric form. These are "sharp" tests
in the sense that we either reject the hypothesis of maximization or not.
But in many cases it is often more appropriate to have a goodness-of-fit
measure: how close are the observed choices to maximizing choices?
   In order to answer this question, we need a sensible definition of "close."
In the nonparametric analysis of profit maximization, we saw that one
reasonable measure of this was how much additional profit the firm could
have acquired if it had behaved differently. This idea can be applied more
generally: one measure of goodness-of-fit is how far the economic agent
fails to optimize the postulated objective function.
   This measure can be calculated directly in the case of firm behavior.
If our hypothesis is profit maximization or cost minimization, we simply
calculate the lost profits or excess costs by comparing the best-fitting opti-
mizing model to the actual choices. The application to utility maximization
is slightly more subtle.
   Suppose that we are examining consumer choice behavior using a Cobb-
Douglas functional form. If the best fitting Cobb-Douglas utility function
202 ECONOMETRICS (Ch. 12)


is described by the parameters (&), say, we can compare the utility of the
optimal choices using the estimated utility function to the utility of the
actual choices.
   The problem with this measure is that the units of the utility function
are arbitrary. What counts as "close" is not at all obvious. The solution
to this problem is to use a particular utility function for calculating the
goodness-of-fit measure. A natural choice here is the money metric util-
ity function described in Chapter 7, page 109. The money metric utility
function measures utility in units of money: how much money a consumer
would need at fixed prices to be as well off as he would be consuming a
bundle x.
   Let's see how to use this to construct a goodness-of-fit measure. S u p
pose we observe some data (p t , x t ) for t = 1,. . . , T. We hypothesize that
the consumer is maximizing a utility function u(x, P), where ,l3 is an un-
known parameter (or list of parameters). Given u(x, p ) we know that we
can construct the money metric utility function m(p,x,@) using standard
optimization techniques.
                                                                 6)
   We use the choice data to estimate the utility function u(x, that best
describes the observed choice behavior. One way to see how well this utility
function "fits" is to calculate the t "residuals"




Here Gt measures the minimal amount of money the consumer needs to
spend to get utility u(xt,p) compared to the amount of money the con-
sumer actually spent. This has a natural interpretation in terms of effi-
ciency: if the average value of Gt isc,then we can say that on the average
the consumer is c-percent efficient in his choice behavior.
-If the consumer is perfectly maximizing the utility function u(x,p) then
G will equal 1-the consumer will be 100% efficient in his consumption
          c
choice. If is .95, then the consumer is 95% efficient, and so on.


12.6 Structural models and reduced form models
Suppose that we have a theory that suggests some relationships among a
number of variables. Typically, there will be two types of variables in our
model, endogenous variables, whose values are determined by our model,
and exogenous variables, whose values are predetermined. For example,
in our model of profit-maximizing behavior, the prices and the technology
are exogenous variables, and the factor choices are endogenous variables.
   Typically, a model can be expressed as a system of equations, each equa-
tion involving some relationships among the exogenous variables, the en-
dogenous variables, and the parameters. This system of equations is known
as a structural model.
                        STRUCTURAL MODELS AND REDUCED FORM MODELS        203


  Consider, for example, a simple demand and supply system:

                         D = a0 - a l p + a221 + el
                          S = bo   + blp + b2~2+ €2
                         D=S

Here D and S represent the (endogenous) demand and supply for some
good, p is its (endogenous) price, (a,) and (b,) are parameters, and zl
and 2 2 are other exogenous variables that affect demand and supply. The
variables €1 and €2 are error terms. The system (12.2) is a structural
system.
  We could solve the structural system in a way that expressed the en-
dogenous variable p as a function of the exogenous variables:




This is the reduced form of the system.
  It is usually not too difficult to estimate the reduced form of a model.
In the demand-supply example. we would just estimate a regression of the
form
                        p = Po + P l Z l + P 2 ~ 2+ € 3 .
The parameters (P,) are a function of the parameters (a,, b,), but in general
it will not be possible to recover unique estimates of the structural param-
eters (a,, b,) from the reduced-form parameters (P,). The reduced-form
parameters can be used to predict how the equilibrium price will change as
the exogenous variables change. This may be useful for some purposes.
   But for other purposes it may be necessary to have estimates of the
structural parameters. For example, suppose that we wanted to predict how
the equilibrium p r i ~ ein this market would respond to the imposition of a
tax on the good. The structural model (12.2) suggests that the equilibrium
price received by suppliers, p,, should be a linear function of the tax:




If we had data describing many different choices of taxes and the resulting
supply prices. we could estimate the reduced form described by (12.4). But
if we don't have such data, there is no way to estimate this reduced form.
In order to predict how the equilibrium price will respond to the tax, we
need to know the structural parameter bl/(al + bl). The reduced form
parameters in equation (12.3) just don't provide enough information to
answer this question.
   This suggests that we must consider methods for estimating structural
systems of equations such as (12.2). The simplest method would seem to be
                                                            <J
204 ECONOMETRICS (Ch. 12)


simply to estimate the demand equation and the supply equation separately
using standard ordinary least squares (OLS) regression techniques. Is this
likely t o provide acceptable estimates of parameters?
   We know from statistics that OLS estimates will have desirable properties
if certain assumptions are met. One particular assumption is that the right-
hand side variables in the regression should not be correlated with the error
term.
   However, this is not the case in our problem. The variable p depends on
the error terms €1 and €2, as can easily be seen in equation (12.3). It can
be shown that this dependence will generally result in biased estimates of
the parameters.
   In order to estimate systems of structural equations, we generally need
to use more elaborate estimation techniques such as twestage least squares
or various maximum likelihood techniques. Such methods can be shown to
have better statistical properties than OLS for estimation problems involv-
ing systems of equations.
   In the simple demand-supply example described above, the theoretical
relationship among the variables implies that certain estimation techniques
are more appropriate than others. This will often be the case; part of the art
of econometrics involves using the theory to guide the choice of statistical
techniques. We will investigate this further in the context of an extended
example in the next section.


12.7 Estimating technological relationships                  j




Suppose that we want to estimate the parameters of a simple Cobb-Douglas
production function. To be precise, suppose that we have a sample of farms
and we hypothesize that the output of corn on farm i, Ci, depends on the
corn planted, K,, and the number of sunny days in the growing season,
Si. For the moment, we assume that these are the only two variables that
affect the output of corn.
   We suppose that the production relation is given by a Cobb-Douglas
function C, = K,"S;-~. Taking logs, we can write the relationship between
output and inputs as



Suppose that the farmers do not observe the number of sunny days when
they make their planting decision. Furthermore, the econometrician does
not have data on the number of sunny days at each location. Hence, the
econometrician regards (12.5) as a regression model of the form



where ~i is the "error term" (1 - a ) log Si.
                               ESTIMATING TECHNOLOGICAL RELATIONSHIPS     205


   Econometric theory tells us that OLS will give us good estimates of the
parameter a if log Ki and ~i are uncorrelated. If the farmers don't observe
IogSi = E , when they choose Ki, then their choices cannot be affected
by it. Hence, this is a reasonable assumption in this case, and OLS is an
appropriate estimation technique.
   Let us now look at a case where OLS is not a good estimation technique.
Suppose now that the production relationship also depends on the quality
of land at each farm so that Ci = Q~K;S,~-",or



As before, we assume that neither the econometrician nor the farmers ob-
serve Si. However, let us now suppose that the farmers observe Qi, but
the econometrician doesn't. Now is it likely that estimating the regression
(12.6) will give us good estimates of a?
  The answer is no. Since each farmer observes Qi, his choice of Ki will
depend on Qi. Hence, Ki will be correlated with the error term, and biased
estimates are likely to result.
  If we assume profit-maximizing behavior, we can be quite explicit about
how the farmers will use their information about Ki. The (short-run) profit
maximization problem for farmer i is

                         max pi Q~K:        - qi Ki,

where pi is the price of output and q, is the price of seed facing the ith
farmer. Taking the derivative with respect to Ki and solving for the factor
demand function, we have




It is clear that the farmer's knowledge of Qtdirectly affects his choice of
how much to plant, and thus how much output to produce.
   Consider the scatter diagram of log Ki and logCi in Figure 12.1. We
have also plotted the function log Ci = a log Ki +G, where is the average
quality.
   It is clear from equation (12.7) that farmers with higher quality land will
want to plant more corn. This means that if we observe a farm with a large
input of Ki it is likely to be a farm with large Qi. Hence, the output of the
farm will be larger than the output of a farm with average quality land,
so that the data points for farms with larger Ki's will lie above the true
relationship for farms with average Qs. Similarly, farms with small inputs
of Ki are likely to be farms with smaller than average Qs.
   The result is that a regression line fitted to such data will give us an
estimate for a that is larger than the true value of a. The underlying
         206 ECONOMETRICS (Ch 12)




Figure        S c a t t e r plot. This is a scatter plot of log K, and log C,. Note
12.1          that a farm with a large K, will generally be a farm with better
              than average land, so its output will be larger than that of a farm
              with average quality land. Hence, such points will lie above the
              production relationship for a farm with the average quality of
              land.

         problem is that large values of output are not due entirely to large values
         of inputs. There is a third omitted variable, land quality, that affects both
         the level of output and the choice of input.
            Bias of this sort is very common in econometric work: typically some
         of the regression variables that influence some choice are themselves cho-
         sen by the economic agents. Suppose, for example, that we want t o esti-
         mate the return to education. Generally people with higher income have
         higher amounts of education, but education is not a predetermined variable:
         people choose how much education to acquire. If people choose different
         amounts of education, they are presumably different in other unobserved
         ways. But these unobserved ways could also easily affect their income.
            For example, suppose that people with higher IQ's would earn higher
         wages, regardless of their education. But people with higher IQ's also find
         it easier to acquire more education. This implies that people with higher
         education would have higher wages for two reasons: first, because they
         have higher IQ's on the average, and, second, because they have more
         education. A simple regression of wage on education would overstate the
         effect of education on income.
            Alternatively, one might postulate that people with wealthy parents tend
         to have higher incomes. But wealthy parents can afford to purchase more
         education, and also to contribute more wealth t o their children. Again,
         higher incomes will be associated with higher levels of education, but there
         may be no direct causal link between the two variables.
            Simple regression analysis is appropriate for controlled experiments, but
                                           MORE COMPLEX TECHNOLOGIES      207


  Simple regression analysis is appropriate for controlled experiments, but
often not adequate to deal with situations where the explanatory variables
are chosen by the agents. In such cases it is necessary to have a structural
model that expresses all relevant choices as a function of truly exogenous
variables.


12.8 Estimating factor demands

In the case of production relationships, it may be useful to estimate the
parameters of the production relationship indirectly. Consider for example
equation (12.7). Taking logs, we can write this as

           1             1            1        1
 log K, = -loga       + 1-   logp, - -logq, + -log Q, + log S,.
          1- a           - a         1- a     1- a
An appropriate regression for this equation is



where the constant term Po is some function of a and the mean values of
log Q, and log St. Note that this specification implies that h = -PI.
   Is this equation a likely candidate for OLS estimation? If the farmers
are facing competitive markets for the output and inputs, the answer is
yes, for in competitive markets the prices are outside of the control of the
farmers. If the prices are uncorrelated with the error term, then OLS is an
appropriate estimation technique.
   Furthermore, the fact that P1 = -Pz for an optimizing model gives us
a way to test optimization of a Cobb-Douglas production function. If we
find that P1 is significantly different from -P2, we may be inclined to reject
optimization. On the other hand, if we cannot reject the hypothesis that
pl = -P2, we may be inclined to impose it as a maintained hypothesis and
estimate the model



In this case the demand function is a structural equation: it expresses
choices as a function of exogenous variables. The estimates of this equation
can be used t o infer other properties of the technology.


12.9 More complex technologies

Consider the case where we have a production function relating output
to several inputs. For simplicity, consider the Cobb-Douglas production
function with two inputs: f (xl, x2) = Axyx:.
208 ECONOMETRICS (Ch. 12)


  We know from Chapter 4, page 54, that the factor demand functions
have the form




These demand functions have a linear-in-logarithm form, so we can write
the regression model




Here the parameters of the technology are functions of the regression co-
efficients. However, it is important to observe that the same parameters
a and b enter into the definitions of the coefficients. This means that the
parameters of the two equations are not unrestricted, but are related. For
example, it is easy to see that Pol = Poz. The system of equations should
be estimated taking account of the cross-equation restrictions.
   Alternatively, we could combine the two equations to form the cost func-
tion, c(w, y):



This also has a linear-in-logarithms form


The cross-equation restrictions for the factor demand functions are conve-
niently incorporated into one equation for the cost function. Furthermore,
we know from our theoretical study of the cost function that it should be
an increasing, homogeneous, concave function. These restrictions can be
tested and imposed, if appropriate.
   In fact, the cost function can be regarded as a reduced form of the system
of factor demand. Unlike the demand and supply example we studied
earlier, the cost function contains all of the relevant information about the
structural model. For we know from our study of the cost function that
the derivatives of the cost function give us the conditional factor demands.
Hence, estimating the parameters of the cost function automatically gives
us estimates of the parameters of the conditional factor demand functions.
   However, it should be emphasized that this is only true under the main-
tained hypothesis of cost minimization. If the firms under examination
are indeed minimizing costs or maximizing profits, we can use a variety of
indirect techniques to estimate the technological parameters. These tech-
niques will generally be preferable to direct techniques, if the optimization
hypothesis is true.
                                            CHOICE OF FUNCTIONAL FORM      209



12.1 0 Choice of functional form
All of our examples above have used the Cobb-Douglas functional form.
This is for simplicity, not realism. In general, it is desirable to have a more
flexible parametric form to represent technological tradeoffs.
   One can write down an arbitrary functional form as a production func-
tion, but then one has to calculate the implied factor demands and/or cost
function. It is much simpler to start with a parametric form for a cost
function directly; then it is a simple matter of differentiation to find the
appropriate factor demands.
   We know from Chapter 6 that any monotonic, homogeneous, concave
function of prices is a cost function for some well-behaved technology.
Hence, all that is necessary is to find a functional form with the required
properties.
   In general we want to choose a parametric form for which some values of
the parameters satisfy the restrictions imposed by optimization and some
values don't. Then we can estimate the parameters and test the hypothesis
that the estimated parameters satisfy the relevant restrictions imposed by
the theory. We describe a few examples below.


EXAMPLE: The Diewert cost function

The Diewert cost function takes the form




For this functional form, we require that bij = b j i . Note that we can also
write this form as




Since the first part of this expression has the form of a Leontief cost func-
tion, this form is also known as a generalized Leontief cost function.
   The factor demands have the form




These demands are linear in the bij parameters. If bij 2 0 and some bij > 0,
it is easy to verify that this form satisfies the necessary conditions to be a
cost function.
210 ECONOMETRICS (Ch. 12)


   The bij parameters can be related to the elasticities of substitution be-
tween the various factors; the larger the bij term, the greater the elasticity
of substitution between factors i and j. The functional form imposes no
restrictions on the various elasticities; the Diewert function can serve as a
local second-order approximation to an arbitrary cost function.


EXAMPLE: The translog cost function

The translog cost function takes the form




  For this function, we require that




Under these restrictions, the translog cost function is homogeneous in
prices. If ai > 0 and bij = 0 for all i and j, the cost function becomes
a Cobb-Douglas function.
  The conditional factor demands are not linear in the parameters, but
the factor shares si(w,y) = wixi(w,y)/c(w, y) are linear in parameters
and are given by
                                          k
                        si(w,y) = ai   +1bij In wi.
                                         j=1


12.1 1 Estimating consumer demands
Our earlier examples have focused on estimating production relationships.
These have the convenient feature that the objective function-profit or
cost-is observable. In the case of the consumer demand behavior, the
objective function is not directly observed. This makes things a bit more
complicated conceptually, but doesn't create as many difficulties as one
might expect.
  Suppose that we are given data (p t , x t ) for t = 1 , . . . , T and want to
estimate some parametric demand function. We first investigate the case
where we are interested in the demand for a single good, then the many-
good case.
                                         ESTIMATING CONSUMER DEMANDS     211



Demand functions for a single good

It is important to understand that even when we are only interested in the
demand for a single good, there are still two goods involved: the good in
which we are interested and "all other goods." We generally model this by
thinking of the choice problem as a choice between the good in question
and money to be spent on all other goods. See the discussion of Hicksian
separability in Chapter 9, page 148.
   Suppose that we use x to denote the amount purchased of the good in
question and y to denote money to be spent on all other goods. If p is the
price of the x-good, and q the price of the y-good, the utility maximization
problem becomes
                               max u(xl Y)
                                X,Y

                          such that px   + qy = m.
We denote the demand function by x(p, q, m). Since the demand function
is homogeneous of degree zero, we can normalize by q, so that demand
becomes a function of the relative price of x and real income: x(p/q, m/q).
In practice, p is the nominal price of the good in which we are interested
and q is usually taken to be some consumer price index. The demand spec-
ification then says that the observed quantity demanded is some function
of the "real price," plq, and "real income," mlq.
   One convenient feature of the two-good problem is that virtually any
functional form is consistent with utility maximization. We know from
Chapter 8, page 127, that the integrability equations in the two-good case
can be expressed as a single ordinary differential equation. Thus, there will
always be an indirect utility function that will generate a single demand
equation via Roy's law. Essentially the only requirement imposed by max-
imization in the two-good case is that the compensated own price effect
should be negative.
   This means that one has great freedom in choosing functional forms
consistent with optimization. Three common forms are

  1) linear demand: x = a+ bp + cm.
  2) logarithmic demand: In x = In a + b l n p + c In m.

  3) semi-logarithmic demand: In x = a + bp + cm.

  Each of these equations is associated with an indirect utility function.
We derived indirect utility functions for logarithmic demand in Chapter 26,
page 484, while the linear and semi-log cases were given as exercises. Es-
timating the parameters of the demand functions automatically gives us
estimates of the parameters of the indirect utility function.
212 ECONOMETRICS (Ch. 12)


  Once we have the indirect utility function we can use it to make a variety
of predictions. For example, we can use the estimates to calculate the
compensating or equivalent variation associated with some price change.
For details, see Chapter 10, page 161.


Multiple equations

Suppose that we want to estimate a system of demands for more than two
goods. In this case we could start with a functional form for the demand
equations and then try to integrate them to find a utility function. However,
it is generally much easier to specify a functional form for utility or indirect
utility and then differentiate to find the demand functions.


EXAMPLE: Linear expenditure system

Suppose that the utility function takes the form




where xi > yi. The utility maximization problem is


                              max               ai ln(xi - 7,)
                                 5.
                                          a=l


                         such that        xpizi     = m.


If we let zi = xi - yi, we see that we can write the utility maximization
problem as
                                      k
                          max
                            2%
                                 C ai ln zi
                                  i=l

                     such that E p i z , = m - C p i y i .

   This is a CobbDouglas maximization problem in zi. The demand func-
tions for xi can then easily be seen to have the form
                                                             SUMMARY     213



EXAMPLE: Almost Ideal Demand System
The Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS) has an expenditure function
of the form
                     PI u) = a(p) + b(p)u,                 (12.8)
where




Since e(p, u) must be homogeneous in p, the parameters must satisfy
                        k




                       i=l       j=1        i=l

The demand functions can be derived by differentiating equation (12.8).
However, it is usually more convenient to estimate the expenditure shares



where P is a price index given by




and
                                     1
                             73. . ---(?*. + 7 3 .

   The AIDS system is close to being linear, except for the price index
term. In practice, econometricians typically use an arbitrary price index
to calculate the m / P terms, and then estimate the rest of the parameters
of the system using equation (12.9).


12.1 2 Summary
We have seen that the theoretical analysis of optimizing models can help
to guide econometric investigations in several ways. First, it can provide
ways to test the theories, in either a nonparametric or a parametric form.
Secondly, the theory can suggest restrictions that can be used to construct
more efficient estimates. Third, the theory can specify structural relation-
ships in the models and guide the choice of estimation techniques. Finally,
the theory can guide the choice of functional forms.
214 ECONOMETRICS (Ch. 12)


Notes

See Deaton & Muelbauer (1980) for a textbook discussion of applying con-
sumer theory to estimation of demand systems. Varian (1990) discusses
goodness-of-fit in more detail and gives some empirical examples.
                     CHAPTER             13

           COMPETITIVE
                  MARKETS

Up until now we have studied maximizing behavior of individual economic
agents: firms and consumers. We have taken the economic environment
as given, completely summarized by the vector of market prices. In this
chapter we begin our study of how the market prices are determined by
the actions of the individual agents. We start with the simplest model: a
single competitive market.


13.1 The competitive firm

A competitive firm is one that takes the market price of output as being
given and outside of its control. In a competitive market each firm takes
the price as being independent of its own actions, although it is the actions
of all firms taken together that determine the market price.
   Let p be the market price. Then the demand curve facing an ideal
competitive firm takes the form
216 COMPETITIVE MARKETS (Ch. 13)


   A competitive firm is free to set whatever price it wants and produce
whatever quantity it is able to produce. However, if a firm is in a compet-
itive market, and it sets a price above the prevailing market price, no one
will purchase its product. If it sets its price below the market price, it will
have as many customers as it wants; but it will needlessly forego profits,
since it can also get as many customers as it wants by pricing a t the market
price. This is sometimes expressed by saying that a competitive firm faces
an infinitely elastic demand curve.
   If a competitive firm wants to sell any output at all, it must sell it at the
market price. Of course, real world markets seldom achieve this ideal. The
question is not whether any particular market is perfectly competitive-
almost no market is. The appropriate question is to what degree models of
perfect competition can generate insights about real-world markets. Just
as frictionless models in physics can describe some important phenomena in
the physical world, the frictionless model of perfect competition generates
useful insights in the economic world.


13.2 The profit maximization problem
Since the competitive firm must take the market price as given, its profit
maximization problem is very simple. It must choose output y so as to
solve
                            m F PY - c(Y).
The first-order and second-order conditions for an interior solution are




We will typically assume that the second-order condition is satisfied as a
strict inequality. This is not really necessary, but it makes some of the
calculations simpler. We refer to this as the regular case.
  The inverse s u p p l y function, denoted by p(y), measures the price
that must prevail in order for a firm to find it profitable t o supply a given
amount of output. According t o the first-order condition, the inverse supply
function is given by
                                P(Y)= cf(y),
as long as cff(y)> 0.
  The s u p p l y function gives the profit-maximizing output a t each price.
Therefore the supply function, y(p), must identically satisfy the first-order
condition
                                   '
                                 P cf(y(p)),                           (13.1)
and the second-order condition
                                       THE PROFIT MAXIMIZATIONPROBLEM       217




                                                   OUTPUT

     Supply function and cost curves. In well-behaved cases, the                   Figure
     supply function of a competitive firm is the upward sloping part              13.1
     of the marginal cost curve that lies above the average variable
     cost curve.

   The direct supply curve and the inverse supply curve measure the same
relationship-the relationship between price and the profit-maximizing sup-
ply of output. The two functions simply describe the relationship in differ-
ent ways.
   How does the supply of a competitive firm respond to a change in the
price of output? We differentiate expression (13.1) with respect to p to find



Since normally cl'(y) > 0, it follows that yl(p) > 0. Hence, the supply curve
of a competitive firm has a positive slope, at least in the regular case. We
derived this same result earlier in Chapter 2 using different methods.
   We have focused on the interior solution to the profit maximization prob-
lem, but it is of interest to ask when the interior solution will be chosen.
                                                     +
Let us write the cost function as c(y) = cv(y) F, so that total costs
are expressed as the sum of variable costs and fixed costs. We interpret
the fixed costs as being truly fixed-they must be paid even if output is
zero. In this case, the firm will find it profitable to produce a positive level
of output when the profits from doing so exceed the profits (losses) from
producing zero:
                         PY (P) - cv (Y(P))- F 2 -F.
Rearranging this condition, we find that the firm will produce positive
levels of output when



that is, when price is greater than average variable cost. See Figure 13.1
for a picture.
218 COMPETITIVE MARKETS (Ch. 13)



13.3 The industry supply function

The industry supply function is simply the sum of the individual firm
supply functions. If yi(p) is the supply function of the ith firm in an industry
with m firms, the industry supply function is given by




The inverse supply function for the industry is just the inverse of this
function: it gives the minimum price at which the industry is willing to
supply a given amount of output. Since each firm chooses a level of out-
put where price equals marginal cost, each firm that produces a positive
amount of output must have the same marginal cost. The industry s u p
ply function measures the relationship between industry output and the
common marginal cost of producing this output.



EXAMPLE: Different cost functions

Consider a competitive industry with two firms, one with cost function
cl ( y ) = Y 2 , and other with cost function c 2 ( y )= 2y2. The supply functions
are given by
                                   Y1 = ~ 1 2
                                   Y2 = ~ 1 4 .
The industry supply curve is therefore Y ( p ) = 3p/4. For any level of
industry output Y , the marginal cost of production in each firm is 4 Y / 3 .



EXAMPLE: identical cost functions

Suppose that there are m firms that have the common cost function c ( y ) =
y2+   1 . The marginal cost function is simply M C ( y ) = 2y, and the average
variable cost function is A V C ( y ) = y. Since in this example the marginal
costs are always greater than the average variable costs, the inverse supply
function of the firm is given by p = M C ( y ) = 2y.
   It follows that the supply function of the firm is y ( p ) = p / 2 and the
industry supply function is Y ( p ,m) = m p / 2 . The inverse industry supply
function is therefore p = 2 Y l m . Note that the slope of the inverse supply
function is smaller the larger the number of firms.
                                                                     MARKET EQUILIBRIUM   219



13.4 Market equilibrium
The industry supply function measures the total output supplied at any
price. The industry demand function measures the total output de-
manded at any price. An equilibrium price is a price where the amount
demanded equals the amount supplied.
   Why does such a price deserve to be called an equilibrium? The usual
argument is that at any price at which demand does not equal supply,
some economic agent would find it in its interest to unilaterally change
its behavior. For example, consider a price in which the amount supplied
exceeds the amount demanded. In this case some firms will not be able
to sell all of the output that they produced. By cutting production these
firms can save production costs and not lose any revenue, thereby increasing
profits. Hence such a price cannot be an equilibrium.
   If we let 2,(p) be the demand function of individual i for i = 1, . . . , n and
y3 ( p ) be the supply function of firm j for j = 1, . . . , m, then an equilibrium
price is simply a solution to the equation




EXAMPLE: Identical firms
Suppose that the industry demand curve is linear, X ( p ) = a - bp, and the
industry supply curve is that derived in the last example, Y ( p ,m) = m p / 2 .
The equilibrium price is the solution to
                                   a - bp = m p / 2 ,
which im~lies


Note that in this example the equilibrium price decreases as the number of
firms increases.
   For an arbitrary industry demand curve, equilibrium is determined by
                              X ( P >= ~ Y ( P ) .
How does the equilibrium price change as m changes? We regard p as an
implicit function of m and differentiate to find
                                       ) m y ' ( p ) p f (m)+ Y ( P )7
                      X f ( P ) P ' ( ~=
which implies
                                                Y(P>        +,

                                     = X I( p ) -                .
Assuming that industry demand has a negative slope, the equilibrium price
must decline as the number of firms increases.
         220 COMPETITIVE MARKETS (Ch. 13)



         13.5 Entry

         The previous section described the computation of the industry supply
         curve when there was an exogenously given number of firms. However,
         in the long run, the number of firms in an industry is variable. If a firm
         expects that it can make a profit by producing a particular good, we might
         expect that it would decide to do so. Similarly, if an existing firm in an
         industry found itself persistently losing money, we might expect that it
         would exit the industry.
           Several models of entry and exit are possible, depending on what sort
         of assumptions one makes about entry and exit costs, the foresight that
         potential entrants possess and so on. In this section we will describe a
         particularly simple model involving zero entry and exit costs and perfect
         foresight.
           Suppose that we have an arbitrarily large number of firms with identical
         cost functions given by c(y). We can calculate the break-even price p*
         where profits are zero a t the optimal supply of output. This is simply the
         level of output where average cost equals marginal cost.
            Now we can plot the industry supply curves if there are 1 , 2 , .. . firms
         in the industry and look for the largest number of firms so that the firms
         can break even. This is shown in Figure 13.2. If the equilibrium number
         of firms is large, then the relevant supply function will be very flat, and
         the equilibrium price will be close to p*. Hence, it is often assumed that
         the supply curve of a competitive industry with free entry is essentially a
         horizontal line at a price equal to the minimum average cost.


         PRICE   I         1




                                                    OUTPUT




Figure               Equilibrium number of firms. In our model of entry, the
13.2                 equilibrium number of firms is the largest number of firms that
                     can break even. If this number is reasonably large, the equilib-
                     rium price must be close t o minimum average cost.
                                                    WELFARE ECONOMICS     221


   In this model of entry, the equilibrium price can be larger than the break-
even price. Even though the firms in the industry are making positive
profits, entry is inhibited since potential entrants correctly foresee that
their entry would result in negative profits.
   As usual, positive profits can be regarded as economic rent. In this
case, we can view the profits as being the "rent to being first." That is,
investors would be willing to pay up to the present value of the stream
of profits earned by an incumbent firm in order t o acquire that stream of
profits. This rent can be counted as an (opportunity) cost of remaining
in the industry. If this accounting convention is followed, firms earn zero
profits in equilibrium.


EXAMPLE: Entry and long-run equilibrium

            +
If c(y) = Y2 1, then the breakeven level of output can be found by setting
average cost equal to marginal cost:



which implies that y = 1. At this level of output, marginal cost is given by
2, so this is the breakeven price. According to our entry model, firms will
enter the industry as long as they determine that they will not drive the
equilibrium price below 2.
   Suppose that demand is linear, as in the previous example. Then the
equilibrium price will be the smallest p* that satisfies the conditions




As m increases, the equilibrium price must get closer and closer to 2.


13.6 Welfare economics

We have seen how to calculate the competitive equilibrium: the price at
which supply equals demand. In this section we investigate the welfare
properties of this equilibrium. There are several approaches to this issue,
and the one we pursue here, the representative consumer approach, is
probably the simplest. Later on, in our discussion of general equilibrium
theory, we will describe a different and more general approach.
  Let us suppose that the market demand curve, x(p), is generated by
maximizing the utility of a single representative consumer who has a utility
                           +
function of the form u(x) y. The x-good is the good under examination
222 COMPETITIVE MARKETS (Ch. 1 3 )


in this particular market. The y-good is a proxy for "everything else."
The most convenient way to think of the y-good is as money left over for
purchasing other goods after the consumer makes the optimal expenditure
on the x-good.
  We have seen in Chapter 10 that this sort of utility function yields an
inverse demand curve of the form



The direct demand function, x(p), is simply the inverse of this function, so
it satisfies the first-order condition



Note the special feature: in the case of quasilinear utility the demand
function is independent of income. This feature makes for especially simple
equilibrium and welfare analysis.
   As long as we've assumed a representative consumer we may as well as-
sume a representative firm, and let it have cost function c ( x ) . We interpret
this as saying that the production of x units of output requires c(x) units
of the y-good, and make the assumption that c(0) = 0. We also assume
that cl'(.) > 0 so that the first-order conditions uniquely determine the
profit-maximizing supply of the representative firm.'
   The profit-maximizing (inverse) supply function of the representative
firm is given by p = c l (x). Hence, the equilibrium level of output of the
x-good is simply the solution to the equation

                                    u1(x) = c1(x).                                 (13.2)

This is the level of output a t which the marginal willingness-tepay for the
x-good just equals its marginal cost of production.


13.7 Welfare analysis

Suppose that instead of using the market mechanism t o determine output,
we simply determined directly the amount of output that maximized the
representative consumer's utility. This problem can be stated as

                                    max u(x)
                                      X?Y
                                                 +y
                              such that y = w - c(x).


  Of course, competitive behavior is very unreasonable if there is literally a single firm;
  it is better to think of this as just the "average" or "representative" behavior of the
  firms in a competitive industry.
                                                                     WELFARE ANALYSIS   223




                     X   X'                 QUANTITY

Figure        Direct utility. The equilibrium quantity maximizes the ver-
13.3          tical area between the demand and the supply curve.


         Here w is the consumer's initial endowment of the y-good.
          Substituting from the constraint, we rewrite this problem as              "


                                    max u(x)
                                        2
                                                       + w - c(x).
         The first-order condition is

                                            U' (x) = C' (x)     ,                   (13.3)

         and the second-order condition is automatically satisfied by our earlier
         curvature assumptions. Note that equations (13.2) and (13.3) determine
         the same level of output: in this instance the competitive market results in
         exactly the same level of production and consumption as does maximizing
         utility directly.
            The welfare maximization problem is simply to maximize total utility:
         the utility of consuming the x-good plus the utility from consuming the y-
         good. Since x units of the x-good means giving up c(x) units of the y-good,
                                                       +
         our social objective function is u(x) w - ~ ( x ) .The initial endowment w
         is just a constant, so we may as well take our social objective function to
         be u(x) - ~ ( x ) .
            We have seen that u(x) is simply the area under the (inverse) demand
         curve up to x. Similarly, c(x) is simply the area under the marginal cost
         curve up to x since
                                                           rx




         and we are assuming that c(0) = 0.
           Hence, choosing x to maximize utility minus costs is equivalent to choos-
         ing x to maximize the area under the demand curve and above the supply
         curve, as in Figure 13.3.
224 COMPETITIVE MARKETS (Ch. 13)


   Here's another way to look at the same calculation. Let CS(x) =
u(x) - px be the consumer's surplus associated with a given level of
output: this measures the difference between the "total benefits" from the
consumption of the x-good and the expenditure on the x-good. Similarly,
let PS(x) = px - c(x) be the profits, or the producer's surplus earned
by the representative firm.
   Then the maximization of total surplus entails

             max CS(x)
               x
                          + PS(x) = [u(x) - px] + [px - ~ ( x ,) ]
or
                              max u(x) - c(x).
                                x
Hence, we can also say that the competitive equilibrium level of output
maximizes total surplus.


13.8 Several consumers

The analysis of the last section only dealt with a single consumer and a
single firm. However, it is easily extended to multiple consumers and firms.
Suppose that there are i = 1,.. . , n consumers and j = 1,. . . , m firms. Each
                                                     +
consumer i has a quasilinear utility function ui(xi) yi and each firm j has
a cost function cj (xj).
   An allocation in this context will describe how much each consumer
consumes of the x-good and the y-good, (xi, yi), for i = 1,. . . , n and how
much each firm produces of the x-good, zj, for j = 1, . . . , m. Since we know
the cost function of each firm, the amount of the y-good used by each firm
j is simply cj(zj). The initial endowment of each consumer is taken to
be some given amount of the y-good, wi, and 0 of the x-good.
   A reasonable candidate for a welfare maximum in this case is an alloca-
tion that maximizes the sum of utilities, subject to the constraint that the
amount produced be feasible. The sum of utilities is




The total amount of the y-good is the sum of the initial endowments, minus
the amount used up in production:




Substituting this into the objective function and recognizing the feasibility
constraint that the total amount of the x-good produced must equal the
                                                       PARETO EFFICIENCY   225


total amount consumed, we have the maximization problem




                 such that   Eri = E zj.
Letting X be the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint, the answer to this
maximization problem must satisfy




along with the feasibility constraint.
   But note that these are precisely the conditions that must be satisfied
by an equilibrium price p* = A. Such an equilibrium price makes marginal
utility equal to marginal cost and simultaneously makes demand equal to
supply. Hence, the market equilibrium necessarily maximizes welfare, at
least as measured by the sum of the utilities.
   Of course, this says nothing at all about the distribution of total utility,
since that will depend on the pattern of initial endowments, (wi). In the
case of quasilinear utility, the equilibrium price doesn't depend on the dis-
tribution of wealth, and any distribution of initial endowments is consistent
with the equilibrium conditions given above.


13.9 Pareto efficiency
We have just seen that a competitive equilibrium maximizes the sum of
utilities, at least in the case of quasilinear utilities. But it is far from
obvious that the sum of utilities is a sensible objective function, even in
this restricted case.
   A more general objective is the idea of Pareto efficiency. A Pareto
efficient allocation is one for which there is no way to make all agents
better off. Said another way, a Pareto efficient allocation is one for which
each agent is as well off as possible, given the utilities of the other agents.
   Let us examine the conditions for Pareto efficiency in the case of quasi-
linear utility functions. For simplicity, we limit ourselves to the situation
where there is some fixed amount of the two goods, (T,jj), and there are
only two individuals. In this case, a Pareto efficient allocation is one that
maximizes the utility of agent 1, say, while holding agent 2 fixed at some
given level of utility ii.


                    such that uz(5- XI)    + - yl = E.
226 COMPETITIVE MARKETS (Ch. 13)


  Substituting from the constraint into the objective function, we have the
unconstrained maximization problem



which has the first-order condition



   For any given value of X I , this condition will uniquely determine an
efficient level of 22. However, the distribution of yl and yz is arbitrary.
Transferring the y-good back and forth between the two consumers makes
one better off and the other worse off, but doesn't affect the marginal
conditions for efficiency at all.
   Finally, consider the relationship between (13.4) and the competitive
equilibrium. At an equilibrium price p*, each consumer adjusts his con-
sumption of the x-good so that

                             u: (2;)= u;(x;) = p*.

Hence, the necessary condition for Pareto efficiency is satisfied. Further-
more, any allocation that is Pareto efficient must satisfy (13.4), which essen-
tially determines a price p* at which this Pareto efficient allocation would
be supported as a competitive equilibrium.
   As it happens, essentially the same results hold in general, even if the
utility functions are not quasilinear. However, in general the equilibrium
prices will depend on the distribution of the y-good. We will investigate
this sort of dependency further in the chapter on general equilibrium.

                                                               I

13.1 0 Efficiency and welfare

On first encounter it seems peculiar that we get the same answer when we
maximize a sum of utilities as when we solve the Pareto efficiency problem.
Let's explore this a bit more. For simplicity we stick with two consumers
and two goods, but everything generalizes to more consumers and goods.
  Suppose that there is some initial amount of the x-good, 3, and some
initial amount of the y-good,        a.
                                     An efficient allocation maximizes one
person's utility given a constraint on the other person's utility level:

                          max u1(21) + Y l
                          xl ,311                                      (13.5)
                    such that u2(3- 21) +jj - y~ = E2.
An allocation that maximizes the sum of utilities solves

                  max ul(x1)
                  X1,Yl
                                    + up(^- XI)+ y1 + Y- y1.            (13.6)
                                                    THE DISCRETE GOOD M O D E L      227


We have already observed that the same x; solves both of these problems.
However, the y-good that solves these two problems is different. Any pair
(yl, y2) maximizes the sum of utilities, but there will only be one value of
yl that satisfies the utility constraint in (13.5). The solution t o (13.5) is
just one of the many solutions t o (13.6).
   The special structure of quasilinear utility implies that all Pareto efficient
allocations can be found by solving (13.6): all Pareto efficient allocations
have the same value of (x;, xa) but they differ in (y;, y;). This is why we
(apparently) got the same answer by maximizing the sum of utilities as by
determining a Pareto efficient allocation d i r e ~ t l y . ~


13.1 1 The discrete good model
The discrete good model is another useful special case for examination of
market behavior. In this model, there are again two goods, an x-good and
a y-good, but the x-good can only be consumed in discrete amounts. In
particular, we suppose that the consumer always purchases either one or
zero units of the x-good.
   Thus the utility achieved by a consumer with income m facing a price
of p if she purchases the good is given by u(1, m - p); if she chooses not
t o purchase the good she gets utility u(0, m). The reservation price is that
price r that just makes the consumer indifferent between purchasing the
x-good or not. That is, it is the price r that satisfies the equation



The demand curve for a single consumer looks like that depicted in Fig-
ure 13.4A; the aggregate demand curve for many consumers with different
reservation prices has the staircase shape depicted in Figure 13.4B.
  The case with quasilinear preferences and a discrete good is especially
simple. In this case the utility if the consumer purchases the good is simply
     +                                                        +
u(1) m - p and her utility if she doesn't is u(0) m. The reservation
price r is the solution to



which is easily seen to be r = u(1) - u(0). Using the convenient normal-
ization that u(0)= 0, we see that the reservation price is simply equal to
the utility of consumption of the x-good.
  If the price of the x-good is p, then a consumer who chooses t o consume
                                   +               +
the good has a utility of u(1) m - p = m r - p. Hence, the consumer's

  There is one caveat t o these claims: they require that we have an interior solution in
  (yl,yz). If consumer 2's target utility level is so low that it can only be achieved by
  setting y2 = 0,then the equivalence between the two problems breaks down.
         228 COMPETITIVE MARKETS (Ch. 13)

          PRICE   I                             PRICE   I




                         1           QUANTITY                              QUANTITY
                              A                                   B
Figure            Reservation price. Panel A depicts the demand curve for a
13.4              single consumer. Panel B depicts the aggregate demand curve
                  for many consumers with different reservation prices.

         surplus r -p is simply a way of measuring the utility achieved by a consumer
         facing price p.
           This special structure makes equilibrium and welfare analysis very sim-
         ple. The market equilibrium price simply measures the reservation price of
         the marginal consumer-the consumer who is just indifferent between
         purchasing and not purchasing the good. The marginal consumer gets
         (approximately) zero consumer's surplus; the infrarnarginal consumers
         typically get positive consumer's surplus.


         13.1 2 Taxes and subsidies
         We have seen that the term comparative statics refers to the analysis of
         how an economic outcome varies as the economic environment changes. In
         the context of competitive markets, we generally ask how the equilibrium
         price and/or quantity changes as some policy variable changes. Taxes and
         subsidies are a convenient example.
            The important thing to remember about a tax is that there are always
         two prices in the system, the demand price and the supply price. The
         demand price, pd, is the price paid by the demanders of a good, and the
         supply price, p,, is the price received by the suppliers of the good; they
         differ by the amount of the tax or subsidy.
            For example, a quantity tax is a tax levied on the amount of a good
         consumed. This means that the price paid by the demanders is greater
         than the price received by the suppliers by the amount of the tax:


         A value tax is a tax levied on the expenditure of a good. It is usually
         expressed as a percentage amount, such as a 10 percent sales tax. A value
         tax at rate T leads to a specification of the form
                                                    TAXES AND SUBSIDIES   229


Subsidies have a similar structure; a quantity subsidy of amount s means
that the seller receives s dollars more per unit than the buyer pays, so that
P d = Ps - s.
   The demander's behavior depends on the price she faces and the sup-
plier's behavior depends on the price that she faces. Hence we write D(pd)
and S ( p s ) .The typical equilibrium condition is that demand equals supply;
this leads to the two equations:




Inserting the second equation into the first, we can solve either




Obviously, the solution for pd and p, is independent of which equation we
solve.
   Another way to solve this kind of tax problem is to use the inverse
demand and supply functions. In this case the equations become




   Once we have solved for the equilibrium prices and quantity, it is reason-
ably straightforward t o do the welfare analysis. The utility of consumption
accruing to the consumer a t the equilibrium x* is u ( x * )-pdx*. The profits
accruing to the firm are p,x* - c(x*).Finally, the revenues accruing to the
government are tx* = (pd- p,)x*. The simplest case is where the prof-
its from the firm and the tax revenues both accrue t o the representative
consumer, yielding a net welfare of



This is simply the area below the demand curve minus the area below the
marginal cost curve, and is depicted in Figure 13.5. The difference between
the surplus achieved with the tax and the welfare achieved in the original
equilibrium is known as the deadweight loss; it is given by the triangle-
shaped region in Figure 13.5. The deadweight loss measures the value t o
the consumer of the lost output.
         230 COMPETITIVE MARKETS (Ch. 13)

          PRICE   I




                                              QUANTITY


Figure            Deadweight loss. The lightly shaded region indihtes the
13.5              total revenue from the tax. The darker triangular region is the
                  deadweight loss.

         Notes

         This is standard neoclassical analysis of a single market. It probably first
         took the form examined here in Marshall (1920).


         Exercises


                          +
         13.1. Let v ( p ) m be the indirect utility function of a representative con-
         sumer, and let ~ ( pbe ) the profit function of a representative firm. Let
                                                              +
         welfare a s a function of price be given by v ( p ) ~ ( p ) .Show that the
         competitive price minimizes this function. Can you explain why the equi-
         librium price minimizes this welfare measure rather than maximizes it?

         13.2. Show that the integral of the supply function between po and pl gives
         the change in profits when price changes from po to pl.

         13.3. An industry consists of a large number of firms, each of which has a
         cost function of the form




           (a) Find the average cost curve of a firm and describe how it shifts as
         the factor price w 1 / w 2 changes.

            (b) Find the short-run supply curve of an individual firm.

            (c) Find the long-run industry supply curve.
                                                                Exercises   231


  (d) Describe an input requirement set for an individual firm.
13.4. Farmers produce corn from land and labor. The labor cost in dollars
to produce y bushels of corn is c(y) = y2. There are 100 identical farms
which all behave competitively.

  (a) What is the individual farmer's supply curve of corn?

  (b) What is the market supply of corn?

  (c) Suppose the demand curve of corn is D(p) = 200 - 50p. What is the
equilibrium price and quantity sold?

  (d) What is the equilibrium rent on the land?

13.5. Consider a model where the U.S. and England engage in trade in
umbrellas. The representative firm in England produces the export model
umbrella according to a production function f (K, L) where K and L are
the amounts of capital and labor used in production. Let r and w be
the price of capital and the price of labor respectively in England, and
let c(w, r, y) be the cost function associated with the production function
f (K, L). Suppose that initially the equilibrium price of umbrellas is p* and
the equilibrium output is y*. Assume for simplicity that all of the export
model umbrellas are exported, that there is no production of umbrellas in
the US., and that all markets are competitive.

  (a) England decides to subsidize the production and export of umbrellas
by imposing an export subsidy s on each umbrella, so that each umbrella
                                +
exported earns the exporter p s. What size import tax t(s) should the
U.S. choose so as to offset the imposition of this subsidy; i.e., to keep the
production and export of umbrellas constant a t y*? (Hint: This is the easy
part; don't get too subtle.)

   (b) Since it is so easy for the U.S. to offset the effects of this export
subsidy, England decides instead to use a capital subsidy. In particular,
they decide to subsidize capital purchases with a specific subsidy of s so
that the price of capital to English umbrella makers is r - s. The U.S.
decides to retaliate by putting a tax t(s) on imported umbrellas that will
be sufficient to keep the number of umbrellas produced constant at y*.
What must be the relationship between the price paid by the consumers,
p, the tax, t(s), and the cost function, c(w, r, y)?

  (c) Calculate an expression for tf(s) involving the conditional factor
demand function for capital, K(w, r, y).

   (d) Suppose that the production function exhibits constant returns to
scale. What simplification does this make t o your formula for tf(s)?
232 COMPETITIVE MARKETS (Ch. 13)


  (e) Suppose that capital is an inferior factor of production in umbrella
making. What is unusual about the tariff t ( s ) that will offset the capital
subsidy in England?

13.6. On a tropical island there are 100 boat builders, numbered 1 through
100. Each builder can build up to 12 boats a year and each builder maxi-
mizes its profits given the market price. Let y denote the number of boats
built per year by a particular builder, and suppose that builder 1 has a
                         +
cost function c(y) = 11 y, builder 2 has a cost function c(y) = 11 2y,    +
etc. That is, for each i, from 1 to 100, boat builder i has a cost function
          +
c(y) = 11 iy. Assume that the fixed cost of $11 is a quasifixed cost; i.e.,
it is only paid if the firm produces a positive level of output. If the price of
boats is 25, how many builders will choose to produce a positive amount of
output? If the price of boats is 25, how many boats will be built per year
in total?

13.7. Consider an industry with the following structure. There are 50 firms
that behave in a competitive manner and have identical cost functions given
by c(y) = y2/2. There is one monopolist that has 0 marginal costs. The
demand curve for the product is given by




  (a) What is the monopolist's profit-maximizing output?

  (b) What is the monopolist's profit-maximizing price?

  (c) How much does the competitive sector supply at this price?

13.8. U.S. consumers have a demand function for umbrellas which has the
form D(p) = 90 - p. Umbrellas are supplied by U.S. firms and U.K. firms.
For simplicity, assume that there is a single representative firm in each
country that behaves competitively. The cost function for producing um-
brellas is given by c(y) = y2/2 in each country.

  (a) What is the aggregate supply function for umbrellas?

  (b) What is the equilibrium price and quantity sold?

  (c) Now the domestic industry lobbies for protection and Congress agrees
to put a $3 tariff on foreign umbrellas. What is the new U.S. price for
umbrellas paid by the consumers?

  (d) How many umbrellas are supplied by foreign firms and how many
are supplied by domestic firms?
                     CHAPTER            14

            MONOPOLY


The word monopoly originally meant the right of exclusive sale. It has
come to be used to describe any situation in which some firm or small
group of firms has the exclusive control of a product in a given market.
The difficulty with this definition comes in defining what one means by a
"given market." There are many firms in the soft-drink market, but only
a few firms in the cola market.
   The relevant feature of a monopolist from the viewpoint of economic
analysis is that a monopolist has market power in the sense that the amount
of output that it is able to sell responds continuously as a function of the
price it charges. This is to be contrasted to the case of a competitive firm
whose sales drop to zero if it charges a price higher than the prevailing
market price. A competitive firm is a pnce-taker; a monopoly is a price-
maker.
   The monopolist faces two sorts of constraints when it chooses its price
and output levels. First, it faces the standard technological constraints of
the sort described earlier-there are only certain patterns of inputs and
outputs that are technologically feasible. We will find it convenient t o
summarize the technological constraints by the use of the cost function,
234 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)


c(y). (We omit the factor prices as an argument in the cost function since
we will assume that they are fixed.)
   The second set of constraints that the monopolist faces is that presented
by the consumers1 behavior. The consumers are willing to purchase differ-
ent amounts of the good at different prices, and we summarize this rela-
tionship using the demand function, D(p).
   The monopolist's profit maximization problem can be written as

                                  max PY - c(y)
                                   P,Y
                             such that D(p) 2 y

  In most cases of interest, the monopolist will want to produce the amount
that the consumers demand, so the constraint can be written as the equality
y = D(p). Substituting for y in the objective function, we have the problem




Although this is perhaps the most natural way to pose the monopolist's
maximization problem, it turns out to be more convenient in most situa-
tions to use the inverse rather than the direct demand function.
   Let p(y) be the inverse demand function-the price that must be charged
to sell y units of output. Then the revenue that the monopolist can expect
to receive if it produces y units of output is r(y) = p(y)y. We can pose the
monopolist's maximization problem as




The first- and second-order conditions for this problem are




The first-order condition says that a t the profit-maximizing choice of output
marginal revenue must equal marginal cost. Let us consider this condition
more closely. When the monopolist considers selling dy units more output,
it has to take into account two effects. First, its revenues increase by pdy
because it sells more output at the current price. But second, in order to
sell this additional output it must reduce its price by dp = *dy, and this
                                                               dY
lower price applies to all the units y it is selling. The additional revenue
from selling the additional output is therefore given by
                                                              MONOPOLY      235


and it is this quantity that must be balanced against marginal cost.
  The second-order condition requires that the derivative of marginal rev-
enue must be less than the derivative of marginal cost; i.e., the marginal
revenue curve crosses the marginal cost curve from above.
  The first-order condition can be rearranged t o take the form




where


is the (price) elasticity of demand facing the monopolist. Note that
the elasticity will be a negative number as long as the consumers' demand
curve has a negative slope, which is certainly the standard case.
   It follows from the first-order condition that at the optimal level of output
the elasticity of demand must be greater than 1 in absolute value. If this
were not the case, marginal revenue would be negative and hence could not
be equal to the nonnegative marginal cost.
   The optimal output of the monopolist is represented graphically in Fig-
                                                                      +
ure 14.1. The marginal revenue curve is given by rf(y) = p(y) p l (y)y.
Since pl(y) < 0 by assumption, the marginal revenue curve lies beneath the
inverse demand curve.




                               QUANTITY
          Ym

      Determination of the monopoly output. The monopolist                         Figure
      produces where marginal revenue equals marginal cost.                        14.1


   When y = 0 the marginal revenue from selling an extra unit of output
is just the price p(0). However, when y > 0, the marginal revenue from
236 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)

selling an extra unit of output must be less than the price since the only
way t o sell the additional output is to reduce the price, and this reduction
in the price will affect the revenue received from all the inframarginal units
sold.
   The optimal level of output of the monopolist is where the marginal rev-
enue curve crosses the marginal cost curve. In order to satisfy the second-
order condition, the MR curve must cross the MC curve from above. We
will typically assume that there is a unique profit-maximizing level of out-
put. Given the level of output, say y*, the price charged will be given by
P(Y*).


14.1 Special cases

There are two special cases for monopoly behavior that are worth men-
tioning. The first is that of linear demand. If the inverse demand curve is
of the form p(y) = a - by, then the revenue function will be of the form
r(y) = ay - by2 and the marginal revenue takes the form rf(y) = a - 2by.
Hence, the marginal revenue curve is twice as steep as the demand curve.
If firm exhibits constant marginal costs of the form c(y) = cy, we can
solve the marginal revenue equals marginal cost equations to determine
the monopoly price and output directly:
                                      a- c
                                 Y* = -
                                        2b


  The other case of interest is the constant elasticity demand function,
y = A P - ~ . As we saw earlier, the elasticity of demand is constant and
given by ~ ( y=) -b. In this case we can apply (14.3) and write




Hence, for the constant elasticity demand function, price is a constant
markup over marginal cost, with the amount of the markup depending on
the elasticity of demand.


14.2 Comparative statics

It is often of interest to determine how the monopolist's output and price
change as its costs change. Suppose for simplicity that the marginal costs
are constant. Then the profit maximization problem is
                                                     COMPARATIVE STATICS     237

and the first-order condition is




We know from the standard comparative statics calculation that the sign
of dyldc is the same as the sign of the derivative of the first-order condi-
tion with respect to c. This is easily seen to be negative, so we conclude
that a profit-maximizing monopolist will always reduce its output when its
marginal costs increase.
   It is more interesting to calculate the effect of a cost change on price.
We know from the chain rule that

                                   dp
                                   --   --
                                      - dp dy
                                   dc dy dc'

It is clear from this expression that dpldc > 0, but it is often useful to
know the magnitude of dpldc.
   The standard comparative statics calculation tells us that




Taking the appropriate second derivatives of the profit function, we have




It follows that



This can also be written as




From this expression, it is easy to see what happens in the special cases
mentioned above. If demand is linear, then pN(y)= 0 and dpldc = 112. If
the demand function exhibits constant elasticity of 6, then dpldc = E / ( ~ + E ) .
In the case of a linear demand curve, half of a cost increase is passed along
in the form of increased prices. In the case of a constant elasticity demand,
prices increase by more than the increase in costs-the more inelastic the
demand, the more of the cost increase gets passed along.
238 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)



14.3 Welfare and output

We have seen in Chapter 13 that under certain conditions the level of
output at which price equals marginal cost is Pareto efficient. Since the
marginal revenue curve always lies under the inverse demand curve, it is
clear that a monopoly must produce a level of output which is less than this
Pareto efficient amount. In this section we will examine this inefficiency of
monopoly in a bit more detail.
   For simplicity, let us consider an economy with one consumer, possessing
a quasilinear utility function u(x) f y. As we've seen in Chapter 13, the
inverse demand function for this form of utility function is given by p(x) =
ul(x). Let c(x) denote the amount of the y-good necessary to produce
x units of the x-good. Then a sensible social objective is to choose x to
maximize utility:
                               W(x) = u(x) - ~(2).
This implies that the socially optimal level of output, so,is given by




  On the other hand, the level of monopoly output satisfies the condition




Hence, the derivative of the welfare function evaluated at the monopoly
level of output is given by




It follows from the concavity of u(x) that increasing output will increase
utility.
   We could make the same argument slightly differently. We can also write
the social objective function as consumer's surplus plus profits:




The derivative of profits with respect to x is zero at the monopoly output,
since the monopolist chooses the level of output that maximizes profits.
The derivative of consumer's surplus a t x, is given by




which is certainly positive.
                                                         QUALITY CHOICE    239



14.4 Quality choice

Monopolies choose not only output levels, but also other dimensions of the
products they produce. Consider, for example, product quality. Let us
suppose that we can denote product quality by some numerical level q. We
suppose that both utility and costs depend on quality and take the social
objective function to be



(As usual, we assume quasilinear utility for a simple analysis.) We assume
that quality is a good, so that du/dq > 0 and that it is costly to produce,
so that dcldq > 0.
  The monopolist maximizes profits:




The first-order conditions for this problem are




Let us caIcuIate the derivative of the welfare function a t (xm,9,).   We have




Upon substituting from the first-order conditions, we find

               m          m -~
                             -     ~ ( x m l q >m0 ) ~ ~
                    dx                dx



The first equation tells us that, holding quality fixed, the monopolist pro-
duces too little output, relative to the social optimum. The second equation
is not quite so easy to interpret. Since dpldq equals the marginal cost of
producing more quality, it must be positive, so the derivative of welfare
with respect to quality is the difference between two positive numbers and
is, on the face of it, ambiguous.
240 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)


  The question is, can we find any plausible conditions on demand behavior
that will sign the expression? This is a case where it is much easier to see
the answer if we write the social objective function as consumer's surplus
plus profits rather than utility minus costs. The social objective function
takes the form


                      = consumer's surplus     + profits.
Now differentiate this definition with respect to x and q and evaluate the
derivative at the monopolist's profit-maximizing level of output. Since the
monopolist is maximizing profits, the derivatives of monopoly profits with
respect to output and quality must vanish, indicating that the derivative
of welfare with respect to quantity and quality is precisely the derivative
of consumer's surplus with respect to quantity and quality.
   The derivative of consumer's surplus with respect to quantity is always
positive, which is just another way of saying that the monopolist produces
too little output. The derivative of consumer's surplus with respect to
quality is ambiguous-it may be positive or it may be negative. Its sign
depends on the sign of d2p(x,q)/dxdq.
   To see this, consider Figure 14.2. When quality increases, the demand
curve shifts up and (possibly) tilts one way or the other. Decompose this
movement into a parallel shift up and a pivot, as indicated. Consumer's
surplus is unaffected by the parallel shift, so the total change simply de-
pends on whether the inverse demand curve becomes flatter or steeper. If
the slope of the inverse demand curve gets flatter consumer's surplus goes
down and vice-versa.   '
   Another way to interpret equation (14.5) is based on consideration of the
reservation price model. Think of p(x, q) as measuring the reservation price
of consumer x, so that u(x, q) is just the sum of the reservation prices. In
this interpretation, u(x, q)/x is the average willingness to pay and p(x, q)
is the marginal willingness to pay. We can rewrite (14.5) as




The derivative of welfare with respect to q is now seen to be proportional to
the derivative of the average willingness to pay for the quality change minus
the derivative of the marginal willingness to pay for the quality change.
  Social welfare depends on the sum of the consumers' utility or willingness
to pay; but the monopolist only cares about the willingness to pay of the
marginal individual. If these two values are different, the monopolist's
quality choice will not be optimal from the social viewpoint.

  Note that the slope of the demand curve is negative; to say the slope gets flatter
  means that it gets closer to zero.
                                                   PRICE DISCRIMINATION   241

PRICE




           xm                           QUANTITY


        Effect on consumer's surplus of a change in quality.                     Figure
        When the demand curve shifts up and tilts, the effect on con-            14.2
        sumer's surplus depends only on the direction of the tilt.


14.5 Price discrimination

Loosely speaking, price discrimination involves selling different units of the
same good at different prices, either to the same or different consumers.
Price discrimination arises naturally in the study of monopoly since we
have seen that a monopolist will typically desire to sell additional output
if it can find a way to do so without lowering the price on the units it is
currently selling.
   In order for price discrimination to be a viable strategy for the firm, it
must have the ability to sort consumers and to prevent resale. Preventing
resale is generally not a severe problem, and most of the difficulties associ-
ated with price discrimination are concerned with sorting the consumers.
The easiest case is where the firm can explicitly sort consumers with re-
spect to some exogenous category such as age. A more complex analysis is
necessary when the firm must price discriminate on the basis of some en-
dogenous category such as the amount of purchase or the time of purchase.
In this case the monopolist faces the problem of structuring its pricing so
that consumers "self select" into appropriate categories.
   The traditional classification of the forms of price discrimination is due
to Pigou (1920).

  First-degree price discrimination involves the seller charging a dif-
  ferent price for each unit of the good in such a way that the price charged
  for each unit is equal to the maximum willingness-to-pay for that unit.
  This is also known as perfect price discrimination
242 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)


  Second-degree price discrimination occurs when prices differ de-
  pending on the number of units of the good bought, but not across con-
  sumers. This phenomenon is also known as nonlinear pricing. Each
  consumer faces the same price schedule, but the schedule involves dif-
  ferent prices for different amounts of the good purchased. Quantity dis-
  counts or premia are the obvious examples.

  Third-degree price discrimination means that different purchasers
  are charged different prices, but each purchaser pays a constant amount
  for each unit of the good bought. This is perhaps the most common
  form of price discrimination; examples are student discounts, or charging
  different prices on different days of the week.

   We will investigate these three forms of price discrimination in the con-
text of a very simple model. Suppose that there are two potential con-
                                    +
sumers with utility functions ui(x) y, for i = 1,2. For simplicity, normal-
ize utility so that ui(0) = 0. Consumer i's maximum willingness-to-pay for
some consumption level x will be denoted by ri(x). It is the solution t o
the equation
                        ui(O) S y = u ~ ( x )- r i ( ~$.
                                                      ) y.
The left-hand side of the equation gives the utility from zero consumption of
the good, and the right-hand side gives the utility from consuming x units
                                                                 --
and paying a price ri (x). By virtue of our normalization, ri(x) ui(x).
  Another useful function associated with the utility function is the mar-
ginal willingness-to-pay function, i.e., the (inverse) demand function. This
function measures what the per-unit price would have to be to induce the
consumer to demand x units of the consumption good. If the consumer
faces a per-unit price p and chooses the optimal level of consumption, he
or she must solve the utility maximization problem

                                max ui(x)
                                 X>Y
                                            +y
                          such that px   + y = rn.
As we have seen several times, the first-order condition for this problem is



Hence, the inverse demand function is given explicitly by (14.6): the price
necessary to induce consumer i to choose consumption level x is p = pi(x) =
u!,(x).
   We will suppose that the maximum willingness-to-pay for the good by
consumer 2 always exceeds the maximum willingness-to-pay by consumer 1;
i.e., that
                         u2(x) > ul(x) for all x.                    (14.7)
                                           FIRST-DECREE PRICE DISCRIMINATION   243


We will also generally suppose that the marginal willingness-to-pay for the
good by consumer 2 exceeds the marginal willingness-tepay by consumer 1;
i.e., that
                          uk(x) > U ;(x) for all x.                 (14.8)
Thus it is natural to refer to consumer 2 as the high demand consumer
and consumer 1 as the low demand consumer.
  We will suppose that there is a single seller of the good in question who
can produce it at a constant marginal cost of c per unit. Thus the cost
function of the monopolist is c(x) = cx.


14.6 First-degree price discrimination

Suppose for the moment that there is only one agent, so that we can drop
the subscript distinguishing the agents. A monopolist wants to offer the
agent some price and output combination (r*,x*) that yields the maximum
profits for the monopolist. The price T * is a take-it-or-leave-it p r i c e t h e
consumer can either pay r* and consume a*,or consume zero units of the
good.
  The profit maximization problem of the monopolist is

                                    max r - cx
                                     T,X

                              such that u(x)     > r.
The constraint simply indicates that the consumer must get nonnegative
surplus from his consumption of the x-good. Since the monopolist wants T
to be as large as possible, this constraint will be satisfied as an equality.
  Substituting from the constraint and differentiating, we find the first-
order condition determining the optimal level of production to be



Given this level of production, the take-it-or-leave-it price is



   There are several points worth noting about this solution. First, the
monopolist will choose t o produce a Pareto efficient level of output-a
level of output where the marginal willingness-to-pay equals marginal cost.
However, the producer will also manage to capture all the benefits from this
efficient level of production-it will achieve the maximum possible profits,
while the consumer is indifferent to consuming the product or not.
   Second, the monopolist in this market produces the same level of output
as would a competitive industry. A competitive industry will produce where
244 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)


price equals marginal cost and supply equals demand. Together, these two
conditions imply that p(x) = c, which is precisely the equation (14.9)
coupled with the definition of the inverse demand function in (14.6). Of
course, the gains from trade are divided much differently in the competitive
equilibrium. In this case, the consumer gets utility u(x*)-cx* and the firm
gets zero profits.
   Third, the same outcome can be achieved if the monopolist sells each unit
of output to the consumer a t a different price. Suppose, for example, that
the firm breaks up the output into n pieces of size Ax, so that x = nAx.
Then the willingness-to-pay for the first unit of consumption will be given
by
                        u(0)   + m = AX) + m - p l ,

Similarly, the marginal willingness-to-pay for the second unit of consump-
tion is
                           AX) = u(2Ax) - pa.
Proceeding this way up to the n units, we have the sequence of equations,




Adding up these n equations and using the normalization that u(0) = 0, we
have Cy=,p, = u(x). That is the sum of the marginal willingnesses-to-pay
must equal the total willingness-to-pay. So it doesn't matter how the firm
price discriminates: making a single take-it-or-leave it offer, or selling each
unit of the good at the marginal willingness-to-pay for that unit.


14.7 Second-degree price discrimination

Second-degree price discrimination is also known as nonlinear pricing.
This involves such practices as quantity discounts, where the revenue a firm
collects is a nonlinear function of the amount purchased. In this section we
will analyze a simple problem of this type.
    Recall the notation introduced earlier. There are two consumers with
                        +                +
utility functions ul (xl) yl and u2(x2) y2, where we assume that u2(x) >
u l (x) and uh (x) > u i (x). We refer to consumer 2 as the high-demand con-
sumer and consumer 1 as the low-demand consumer. The assumption that
the consumer with the larger total willingness-to-pay also has the larger
                                   SECOND-DEGREE PRICE DISCRIMINATION     245

marginal willingness-to-pay is sometimes known as the single crossing
property since it implies that any two indifference curves for the agents
can intersect at most once.
  Suppose that the monopolist chooses some (nonlinear) function p(x) that
indicates how much it will charge if x units are demanded. Suppose that
consumer i demands x, units and spends ri = p(xi)xi dollars. From the
viewpoint of both the consumer and the monopolist all that is relevant is
that the consumer spends ri dollars and receives xi units of output. Hence,
the choice of the function p(x) reduces to the choice of (ri, xi). Consumer
1 will choose (TI,x l ) and consumer 2 will choose (r2,x2).
  The constraints facing the monopolist are as follows. First, each con-
sumer must want to consume the amount xi and be willing to pay the
price r,:
                               ul(x1) - T I 2 0
                                           >
                               u2(x2) - 7-2 0.
This simply says that each consumer must do at least as well consuming
the x-good a s not consuming it. Second, each consumer must prefer his
consumption t o the consumption of the other consumer.




These are the so-called self-selection constraints. If the plan (XI,x2)
is t o be feasible in the sense that it will be voluntarily chosen by the con-
sumers, then each consumer must prefer consuming the bundle intended
for him as compared to consuming the other person's bundle.
   Rearrange the inequalities in the above paragraph as




   Of course, the monopolist wants to choose rl and 1-2 to be as large as
possible. It follows that in general one of the first two inequalities will be
binding and one of the second two inequalities will be binding. It turns out
that the assumptions that u2(x) > u1(x) and uL(x) > ui(x) are sufficient
t o determine which constraints will bind, as we now demonstrate.
   To begin with, suppose that (14.12) is binding. Then (14.13) implies a
that
                            r2 Ir 2 - u2(x1) + T I ,
246 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)


Using (14.7)we can write



which contradicts (14.10). It follows that (14.12)is not binding and that
(14.13)is binding, a fact which we note for future use:



  Now consider (14.10) and (14.11). If (14.11) were binding, we would
have
                     T1 = ~ l ( ~ 1-)u1(22) r2.+
Substitute from (14.14)to find



which implies
                    uz(x2)- u2(x1)= 211 ( 2 2 ) - 211 (21).
We can rewrite this expression as


                        l:  u;(t) dt =   l;  u;(t) dt.

However, this violates the assumption that ua(x)> ui(x).It follows that
(14.11)is not binding and that (14.10)is binding, so



  Equations (14.14)and (14.15)imply that the low-demand consumer will
be charged his maximum willingness-to-pay, and the high-demand con-
sumer will be charged the highest price that will just induce him to consume
22 rather than XI.
  The profit function of the monopolist is



which upon substitution for 7-1 and 7-2 becomes



This expression is to be maximized with respect to xl and x2. Differenti-
ating, we have
                                    SECOND-DEGREE PRICE DISCRIMINATION      247


Equation (14.16) can be rearranged to give



which implies that the low-demand consumer has a (marginal) value for the
good that exceeds marginal cost. Hence he consumes an inefficiently small
amount of the good. Equation (14.17) says that at the optimal nonlinear
prices, the high-demand consumer has a marginal willingness-tepay which
is equal to marginal cost. Thus he consumes the socially correct amount.
   Note that if the single-crossing property were not satisfied, then the
bracketed term in (14.18) would be negative and the low-demand consumer
would consume a larger amount than he would at the efficient point. This
can happen, but it is admittedly rather peculiar.
   The result that the consumer with the highest demand pays marginal
cost is very general. If the consumer with the highest demand pays a price
in excess of marginal cost, the monopolist could lower the price charged to
the largest consumer by a small amount, inducing him to buy more. Since
price still exceeds marginal cost, the monopolist would make a profit on
these sales. Furthermore, such a policy wouldn't affect the monopolist's
profits from any other consumers, since they are all optimized at lower
values of consumption.


EXAMPLE: A graphical treatment

The price discrimination problem with self-selection can also be treated
graphically. Consider Figure 14.3 which depicts the demand curves of the
two consumers; for simplicity we assume zero marginal cost. Figure 14.3A
depicts the price discrimination if there is no self-selection problem. The
firm would simply sell xg to the high-demand consumer and xf to the low-
demand consumer at prices that are equal to their respective consumer's
surpluses-i.e., the areas under their respective demand curves. Thus the
                                     +
high-demand consumer pays A+ B C to consume xi and the low-demand
consumer pays A to consume xf.
   However, this policy violates the self-selection constraint. The high-
demand consumer prefers the low-demand consumer's bundle, since by
choosing it he receives a net surplus equal to the area B. In order to
satisfy the self-selection constraint, the monopolist must offer xg at a price
           +
equal to A C, which leaves the high-demand consumer a surplus equal to
B no matter which bundle he chooses.
   This policy is feasible, but is it optimal? The answer is no: by offering the
low-demand consumer a slightly smaller bundle, the monopolist loses the
profits indicated by the black triangle in Figure 14.3B, and gains the profits
indicated by the shaded trapezoid. Reducing the amount offered to the low-
demand consumer has no first-order effect on profits since the marginal
         248 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)


         willingness-to-pay equals zero a t xp However, it increases profits non-
         marginally since the high-demand consumer's willingness-to-pay is larger
         than zero at this point.
            At the profit-maximizing level of consumption for the low-demand con-
         sumer, x? in Figure 14.3C, the marginal decrease in profits collected from
         the low-demand consumer from a further reduction, p l , just equals the mar-
         ginal increase in profits collected from the high-demand consumer, pz - P I .
         (Note that this also follows from equation (14.18).) The final solution has
         the low-demand consumer consuming at x y and paying A, thereby receiv-
         ing zero surplus from his purchase. The high-demand consumer consumes
                                                             + +
         at xx, the socially correct amount, and pays A C D for this bundle,
         leaving him with positive surplus in the amount B.




                              QUANTITY                  QUANTITY                  QUANTITY




Figure        Second-degree price discrimination. Panel A depicts the
14.3          solution if self-selection is not a problem. Panel B shows that
              reducing the bundle of the low-demand consumer will increase
              profits, and panel C shows the profit-maximizing level of output
              for the low-demand consumer.



         14.8 Third-degree price discrimination

         Third-degree price discrimination occurs when consumers are charged dif-
         ferent prices, but each consumer faces a constant price for all units of output
         purchased. This is probably the most common form of price discrimination.
            The textbook case is where there are two separate markets, where the
         firm can easily enforce the division. An example would be discrimination
         by age, such as youth discounts at the movies. If we let p,(x,) be the inverse
         demand function for group i, and suppose that there are two groups, then
         the monopolist's profit maximization problem is

                                           +
                            max p ~ ( x ~ ) x ~
                            x1 ,I2
                                            pz(zz)x2 - cxi - cxz.
                                      THIRD-DEGREE PRICE DISCRIMINATION     249


The first-order conditions for this problem are




Let e, be the elasticity of demand in market i, we can write these expressions




It follows that p l ( x l ) > p2(x2)if and only if 1611 < 1 ~ ~ 1 .
                                                               Hence, the market
with the more elastic demand-the market that is more price sensitive-is
charged the lower price.
   Suppose now that the monopolist is unable to separate the markets as
cleanly as assumed, so that the price charged in one market influences the
demand in another market. For example, consider a theater that has a
bargain night on Monday; the lower price on Monday would presumably
influence demand on Tuesday t o some degree.
   In this case the profit maximization problem of the firm is

               max p1 (XI,x2)21+ p2(51,52)52 - cxi - ~ 5 2 ,
               X l ,ZZ


and the first-order conditions become




We can rearrange these conditions to give




  Since we are assuming quasilinear utility, it follows that dplldx2 =
dp2/dx1 ; i.e., the cross-price effects are symmetric. Subtracting the second
equation from the first and rearranging, we have




It is natural to suppose that the two goods are substitutes-after all they
are the same good being sold to different groups-so that dp2/dx1 > 0.
250 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)


Without loss of generality, assume that xl > 22, which, by the equation
immediately above, implies that




Rearranging, we have
                              5 > 1 - lIlf2l                       /

                              P2    1- l l l f l l .
It follows from this expression that if If2 1 > If1 I we must have pl > p2.
That is, if the smaller market has the more elastic demand, it must have
the lower price. Thus, the intuition of the separate markets carries over to
the more general case under these additional assumptions.


Welfare effects

Much of the discussion about third-degree price discrimination has to do
with the welfare effects of allowing this form of price discrimination. Would
we generally expect consumer's plus producer's surplus to be higher or lower
when third-degree price discrimination is present than when it is not?
  We begin with formulating a general test for welfare improvement. Sup-
pose for simplicity that there are only two groups and start with an ag-
gregate utility function of the form u(xl, x2) + y. Here x l and 2 2 are the
consumptions of the two groups and y is money to be spent on other con-
sumption goods. The inverse demand functions for the two goods are given




We assume that u(xl, 52) is concave and differentiable, though this is
slightly stronger than needed.
   Let c(xl, 22) be the cost of providing xl and x2, so that social welfare is
measured by
                      W(x11x2) = ~ ( ~ 1 ~-x~2( )~ 1 ~ x 2 ) .
Now consider two configurations of output, (xy, x:) and (xi, x;), with as-
sociated prices (p!, p;) and (p:, pa). By the concavity of u(xl, x2), we have




Rearranging and using the definition of the inverse demand functions, we
have
                               <          +
                        A u p ( : A ~ l PgAx2.
                                         THIRD-DEGREE PRICE DISCRIMINATION     251


    By an analogous argument, we have



    Since A W = Au - Ac, we have our final result:



    In the special case of constant marginal cost, Ac = cAxl      + cAx2, so the
    inequality becomes



       Note that these welfare bounds are perfectly general, based only on the
    concavity of the utility function, which is, in turn, basically the requirement
    that demand curves slope down. Varian (1985) derived the inequalities
    using the indirect utility function, which is slightly more general.
       In order to apply these inequalities to the question of price discrimina-
    tion, let the initial set of prices be the constant monopoly prices so that
    p? = p; =         and let (p;,pb) be the discriminatory prices. Then the
    bounds in (14.20) become

        (pO- -)(Axl   + Ax2) 2 A W 2 (pi - c)Axl + (p; - c)Ax2.            (14.21)
r
       The upper bound implies that a necessary condztion for welfare to in-
    crease is that total output zncrease. Suppose to the contrary that total
                                   +
    output decreased so that Axl Ax2 < 0. Since p0 - c > 0, (14.21) implies
    that A W < 0. The lower bound gives a sufficient condition for welfare to
    increase under price discrimination, namely that the sum of the weighted
    output changes is positive, with the weights being given by price minus
    marginal cost.
       The simple geometry of the bounds is shown in Figure 14.4. The welfare
    gain A W is the indicated trapezoid. The area of this trapezoid is clearly
    bounded above and below by the area of the two rectangles.
       As a simple application of the welfare bounds, let us consider the case
    of two markets with linear demand curves,




    For simplicity set marginal costs equal to zero. Then if the monopolist
    engages in price discrimination, he will maximize revenue by selling halfway
    down each demand curve, so that xl = a112 and x2 = a2/2.
      Now suppose that the monopolist sells at a single price to both markets.
    The total demand curve will be
         252 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)




                 h
         PRICE




                       dr                   QUANTITY




Figure           Illustration of the welfare bounds. The trapezoid is the
14.4             true change in consumer's surplus.

         To maximize revenue the monopolist will operate halfway down the demand
         curve which means that



         Hence, with linear demand curves the total output is the same under price
         discrimination as under ordinary monopoly. The bound given in (14.21)
         then implies that welfare must decrease under price discrimination.
            However, this result relies on the assumption that both markets are
         served under the ordinary monopoly. Suppose that market 2 is very small,
         so that the profit-maximizing firm sells zero to this market if price discrim-
         ination is not allowed, as illustrated in Figure 14.5.




Figure           Price discrimination. Here the monopolist would optimally
14.5             choose to serve only the large market if it could not price dis-
                 criminate.
                                                                 Exercises   253


   In this case allowing price discrimination results in Ax1 = 0 and Ax2 >
0, providing an unambiguous welfare gain by (14.21). Of course, this is not
only a welfare gain, but is in fact a Pareto improvement.
   This example is quite robust. If a new market is opened up because of
price discrimination-a market that was not previously being served under
the ordinary monopoly-then we will typically have a Pareto improving
welfare enhancement. On the other hand, if linearity of demand is not
a bad first approximation, and output does not change too drastically in
response to price discrimination, we might well expect that the net impact
on welfare is negative.




The discussion of quality choice is based on Spence (1975). For a survey of
price discrimination see Varian (1989a).


Exercises


14.1. The inverse demand curve is given by p(y) = 10- y, and a monopolist
has a fixed supply of 4 units of a good available. How much will it sell and
what price will it set? What would be the price and output in a competitive
market with these demand and supply characteristics? What would happen
if the monopolist had 6 units of the good available? (Assume free disposal.)

14.2. Suppose that a monopolist faces a demand curve of D(p) = 10- p and
has a fixed supply of 7 units of output to sell. What is its profit-maximizing
price and what are its maximal profits?

14.3. A monopolist faces a demand curve of the form x = 10/p, and has a
constant marginal cost of 1. What is the profit maximizing level of output?

14.4. For what form of demand curve does dp/dc = l ?

14.5. Suppose that the inverse demand curve facing a monopolist is given
by p(y, t ) , where t is a parameter that shifts the demand curve. For sim-
plicity, assume that the monopolist has a technology that exhibits constant
marginal costs. Derive an expression showing how output responds to a
change in t. How does this expression simplify if the shift parameter takes
                               +
the special form p(y, t ) = a(y) b(t)?

14.6. The demand function facing the monopolist is given by D(p) = 10/p,
and the monopolist has positive marginal cost of c. What is the profit-
maximizing level of output?
254 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)


14.7. Suppose marginal costs are constant at c > 0 and that the demand
function is given by




What is the profit-maximizing price?

14.8. For what form of utility function and demand curve does the monop-
olist produce the optimal level of quality, given its quantity choice?

14.9. In the text we gave a graphical argument that if d2p/dxdq > 0 then
duldq - xdp/dq < 0. Let us prove this algebraically. Here are the steps to
follow: 1) Show that the hypothesis implies that if z < x then




2) Express the left-hand side of the inequality in terms of the utility func-
tion. 3) Integrate both sides of this inequality over z ranging from 0 to
x.

14.10. One common way to price discriminate is to charge a lump sum fee
to have the right to purchase a good, and then charge a per-unit cost for
consumption of the good after that. The standard example is an amuse-
ment park where the firm charges an entry fee and a charge for the rides
inside the park. Such a pricing policy is known as a two part tariff. Sup-
pose that all consumers have identical utility functions given by u(x) and
that the cost of providing the service is c(x). If the monopolist sets a two
part tariff, will it produce more or less than the efficient level of output?

14.11. Consider the graphical treatment of the second-degree price discrim-
ination problem. Look at Figure 14.3C carefully and answer the following
question: under what conditions would the monopolist sell only to the
high-demand consumer?

14.12. If the monopolist chooses to sell to both consumers, show that area
B must be less than area A.
14.13. Suppose that there are two consumers who each may purchase one
unit of a good. If the good is of quality q, consumer t achieves utility
u(q, t ) . It costs the monopolist zero to provide quality. Let the maximum
price that consumer t would be willing to pay for quality q be given by wt.
The monopolist cannot distinguish the two consumers and must therefore
offer at most two different qualities between which the consumers can freely
choose. Set up the profit maximization problem for the monopolist, and
analyze it thoroughly. Hint: does this problem look like anything you've
seen before?
                                                                Exercises   255


14.14. The monopolist can also be thought of as choosing the price and
letting the market determine how much is sold. Write down the profit
                                             +
maximization problem and verify that p[l I/€] = d(y) at the optimal
price.

14.15. There is a single monopolist whose technology exhibits constant
marginal costs, i.e., c(y)= cy. The market demand curve exhibits constant
elasticity, 6. There is an ad valorem tax on the price of the good sold so
that when the consumer pays a price Po, the monopolist receives a price
of Ps = (1- 7)PD.(Here PD is the demand price facing the consumer and
Ps is the supply price facing the producer.)
   The taxing authority is considering changing the ad valorem tax to a
                                                  +
tax on output, t, so that we will have Po = Ps t. You have been hired
to calculate the output tax t that is equivalent to the ad valorem tax T in
the sense that the final price facing the consumer is the same under either
scheme.

14.16. Suppose that the inverse demand curve facing a monopolist is given
by p(y, t), where t is a parameter that shifts the demand curve. For sim-
plicity, assume that the monopolist has a technology that exhibits constant
marginal costs.

  (a) Derive an expression showing how output responds to a change in t.

   (b) How does this expression simplify if the inverse demand function
                                     +
takes the special form p(y, t ) = a(y) b(t)?

14.17. Consider a simple economy which acts as though there is one con-
                                    +         +
sumer with utility function ul(xl) u2(x2) y, where xl and 2 2 are the
amounts of goods 1 and 2, respectively, and y is money to spend on all
other goods. Suppose that good 1 is supplied by a firm that acts compet-
itively and good 2 is supplied by a firm that acts like a monopoly. The
cost function for good i is denoted by ci(xi), and there is a specific tax of
amount ti on the output of industry i. Assume that cr > 0, pr < 0, and
p: < 0.

  (a) Derive expressions for dxi/dti for i = 1,2 and sign them.

  (b) Given a change in outputs (dxl, dx2), derive an expression for the
change in welfare.

  (c) Suppose that we consider taxing one of the two industries and using
the proceeds to subsidize the other. Should we tax the competitive industry
or the monopoly?
256 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)


14.18. There are two consumers who have utility functions




The price of the y-good is 1, and each consumer has a "large" initial wealth.
We are given that a2 > a l . Both goods can only be consumed in nonneg-
ative amounts.
   A monopolist supplies the x-good. It has zero marginal costs, but has a
capacity constraint: it can supply at most 10 units of the x-good. The mo-
nopolist will offer at most two price-quantity packages, (rl, XI)and (r2,22).
Here ri is the cost of purchasing x, units of the good.

  (a) Write down the monopolist's profit maximization problem. You
                                                           +
should have 4 constraints plus the capacity constraint xl 2 2 5 10.

  (b) Which constraints will be binding in optimal solution?

   (c) Substitute these constraints into the objective function. What is the
resulting expression?

  (d) What are the optimal values of (TI,XI) and (r2, x2)?

14.19. A monopolist sells in two markets. The demand curve for the mo-
nopolist's product is xl = a1 - blpl in market 1 and x2 = a2 - b2p2 in
market 2, where X I and 2 2 are the quantities sold in each market, and pl
and p2 are the prices charged in each market. The monopolist has zero
marginal costs. Note that although the monopolist can charge different
prices in the two markets, it must sell all units within a market at the
same price.

  (a) Under what conditions on the parameters (al, bl, a2, b2) will the
monopolist optimally choose not to price discriminate? (Assume interior
solutions.)

   (b) Now suppose that the demand functions take the form xi =      ~ ~ ~ c ~ ' ,
for i = 1,2, and the monopolist has some constant marginal cost of c > 0.
Under what conditions will the monopolist choose not to price discriminate?
(Assume interior solutions.)

14.20. A monopolist maximizes p(x)x-c(x). In order to capture some of the
monopoly profits, the government imposes a tax on revenue of an amount t
so that the monopolist's objective function becomes p(x)x - c(x) - tp(x)x.
Initially, the government keeps the revenue from this tax.

  (a) Does this tax increase or decrease the monopolist's output?
                                                              Exercises   257


  (b) Now government decides to award the revenue from this tax to
the consumers of the monopolist's product. Each consumer will receive a
"rebate" in the amount of the tax collected from his expenditures. The
representative consumer who spends px receives a rebate of tpx from the
government. Assuming quasilinear utility, derive an expression for the con-
sumer's inverse demand as a function of x and t.

  (c) How does the monopolist's output respond to the tax-rebate pro-
gram?

14.21. Consider a market with the following characteristics. There is a
single monopolist whose technology exhibits constant marginal costs; i.e.,



The market demand curve exhibits constant elasticity, 6. There is an ad
valorem tax on the price of the good sold so that when the consumer pays
a price Po, the monopolist receives a price of Ps = (1 - r)PD.(Here Po
is the demand price facing the consumer and Ps is the supply price facing
the producer.)
   The taxing authority is considering changing the ad valorem tax to a
tax on output, t, so that we will have PD= Ps + t. You have been hired
to calculate the output tax t that is equivalent to the ad valorem tax T in
the sense that the final price facing the consumer is the same under either
scheme.

14.22. A monopolist has a cost function of c(y) = y so that its marginal
costs are constant at $1 per unit. It faces the following demand curve:




  (a) What is the profit-maximizing choice of output?

  (b) If the government could set a price ceiling on this monopolist in
order to force it to act as a competitor, what price should they set?

  (c) What output would the monopolist produce if forced to behave as a
competitor?

14.23. An economy has two kinds of consumers and two goods. Type A
consumers have utility functions U(x1, xz) = 4x1 - (xq/2) +x2 and Type B
                                                         +
consumers have utility functions U(xl, 22) = 2x1- (xf/2) x2. Consumers
can only consume nonnegative quantities. The price of good 2 is 1 and all
consumers have incomes of 100. There are N type A consumers and N
type B consumers.
258 MONOPOLY (Ch. 14)


  (a) Suppose that a monopolist can produce good 1 at a constant unit
cost of c per unit and cannot engage in any kind of price discrimination.
Find its optimal choice of price and quantity. For what values of c will it
be true that it chooses to sell to both types of consumers?

   (b) Suppose that the monopolist uses a "two-part tariff" where a con-
sumer must pay a lump sum k in order to be able to buy anything at all.
A person who has paid the lump sum k can buy as much as he likes at a
price of p per unit purchased. Consumers are not able to resell good 1. For
p < 4, what is the highest amount k that a type A is willing to pay for
the privilege of buying at price p? If a type A does pay the lump sum k
to buy at price p, how many units will he demand? Describe the function
that determines demand for good 1 by type A consumers as a function of
p and k. What is the demand function for good 1 by type B consumers?
Now describe the function that determines total demand for good 1 by all
consumers as a function of p and Ic.

  (c) If the economy consisted only of N type A consumers and no type
B consumers, what would be the profit-maximizing choices of p and k ?
  (d) If c < 1, find the values of p and k that maximize the monopolist's
profits subject to the constraint that both types of consumers buy from it.
                     CHAPTER            15

       GAME THEORY


Game theory is the study of interacting decision makers. In earlier chap-
ters we studied the theory of optimal decision making by a single agent-a
firm or a consumer-in very simple environments. The strategic interac-
tions of the agents were not very complicated. In this chapter we will lay
the foundations for a deeper analysis of the behavior of economic agents in
more complex environments.
   There are many directions from which one could study interacting deci-
sion makers. One could examine behavior from the viewpoint of sociology,
psychology, biology, etc. Each of these approaches is useful in certain con-
texts. Game theory emphasizes a study of cold-blooded "rational" decision
making, since this is felt to be the most appropriate model for most e c e
nomic behavior.
   Game theory has been widely used in economics in the last decade, and
much progress has been made in clarifying the nature of strategic interac-
tion in economic models. Indeed, most economic behavior can be viewed
as special cases of game theory, and a sound understanding of game theory
is a necessary component of any economist's set of analytical tools.
260 CAME THEORY (Ch. 15)



15.1 Description of a game

There are several ways of describing a game. For our purposes, the strate-
gic f o r m and the extensive f o r m will be sufficient. Roughly speaking
the extensive form provides an "extended" description of a game while the
strategic form provides a "reduced" summary of a game.' We will first
describe the strategic form, reserving the discussion of the extensive form
for the section on sequential games.
   The strategic form of the game is defined by exhibiting a set of players,
a set of strategies, the choices that each player can make, and a set of
payoffs that indicate the utility that each player receives if a particular
combination of strategies is chosen. For purposes of exposition, we will treat
two-person games in this chapter. All of the concepts described below can
be easily extended to multiperson contexts.
   We assume that the description of the g a m e t h e payoffs and the strate-
gies available to the players-are c o m m o n knowledge. That is, each
player knows his own payoffs and strategies, and the other player's payoffs
and strategies. Furthermore, each player knows that the other player knows
this, and so on. We also assume that it is common knowledge that each
player is "fully rational." That is, each player can choose an action that
maximizes his utility given his subjective beliefs, and that those beliefs are
modified when new information arrives according to Bayes' law.
   Game theory, by this account, is a generalization of standard, one-person
decision theory. How should a rational expected utility maximizer behave
in a situation in which his payoff depends on the choices of another rational
expected utility maximizer? Obviously, each player will have to consider
the problem faced by the other player in order to make a sensible choice.
We examine the outcome of this sort of consideration below.


EXAMPLE: Matching pennies

In this game, there are two players, Row and Column. Each player has
a coin which he can arrange so that either the head side or the tail side
is face-up. Thus, each player has two strategies which we abbreviate as
Heads or Tails. Once the strategies are chosen there are payoffs to each
player which depend on the choices that both players make.
   These choices are made independently, and neither player knows the
other's choice when he makes his own choice. We suppose that if both
players show heads or both show tails, then Row wins a dollar and Column


  The strategic form was originally known as the normal form of a game, but this
  term is not very descriptive and its use has been discouraged in recent years.
                                                DESCRIPTION OF A GAME    261



              The game matrix of matching pennies.
                                                                               Table
                                                                               15.1
                                           Column
                                        Heads    Tails
                           Heads
                       Row Tails



loses a dollar. If, on the other hand, one player exhibits heads and the
other exhibits tails, then Column wins a dollar and Row looses a dollar.
   We can depict the strategic interactions in a game matrix. The entry
in box (Head, Tails) indicates that player Row gets -1 and player Column
gets +1 if this particular combination of strategies is chosen. Note that
in each entry of this box, the payoff to player Row is just the negative of
the payoff to player Column. In other words, this is a zero-sum game.
In zero-sum games the interests of the players are diametrically opposed
and are particularly simple to analyze. However, most games of interest to
economists are not zero sum games.

                              2
EXAMPLE: The Prisoner's Dilemma

Again we have two players, Row and Column, but now their interests are
only partially in conflict. There are two strategies: to Cooperate or to
Defect. In the original story, Row and Column were two prisoners who
jointly participated in a crime. They could cooperate with each other and
refuse to give evidence, or one could defect and implicate the other.
   In other applications, cooperate and defect could have different mean-
ings. For example, in a duopoly situation, cooperate could mean "keep
charging a high price" and defect could mean "cut your price and steal
your competitor's market."
   An especially simple description used by Aumann (1987) is the game in
which each player can simply announce to a referee: "Give me $1,000," or
"Give the other player $3,000." Note that the monetary payments come
from a third party, not from either of the players; the Prisoner's Dilemma
is a variable-sum game.
   The players can discuss the game in advance but the actual decisions
must be independent. The Cooperate strategy is for each person to an-
nounce the $3,000 gift, while the Defect strategy is to take the $1,000 (and
run!). Table 15.2 depicts the payoff matrix to the Aumann version of the
Prisoner's Dilemma, where the units of the payoff are thousands of dollars.
   We will discuss this game in more detail below, but we should point out
the "dilemma" before proceeding. The problem is that each party has an
        262 GAME THEORY (Ch. 1 5 )



                                 The Prisoner's Dilemma
Table
15.2                                                 Column
                                               Cooperate    Defect
                                 Cooperate       3, 3     1 014
                           Row    Defect         4,O      I 1,1


        incentive to defect, regardless of what he or she believes the other party
        will do. If I believe that the other person will cooperate and give me a
        $3,000 gift, then I will get $4,000 in total by defecting. On the other hand,
        if I believe that the other person will defect and just take the $1,000, then
        I do better by taking $1,000 for myself.


        EXAMPLE: Cournot duopoly

        Consider a simple duopoly game, first analyzed by Cournot (1838). We
        suppose that there are two firms who produce an identical good at zero
        cost. Each firm must decide how much output to produce without knowing
        the production decision of the other duopolist. If the firms produce a total
        of x units of the good, the market price will be p(x); that is, p(x) is the
        inverse demand curve facing these two producers.
           If xi is the production level of firm i, the market price will then be
             +                                                      +
        p(xl x2), and the profits of firm i are given by ni = p(xl x2)xi. In this
        game the strategy of firm i is its choice of production level and the payoff
        to firm i is its profits.


        EXAMPLE: Bertrand duopoly

        Consider the same setup as in the Cournot game, but now suppose that the
        strategy of each player is to announce the price at which he would be willing
        to supply an arbitrary amount of the good in question. In this case the
        payoff function takes a radically different form. It is plausible to suppose
        that the consumers will only purchase from the firm with the lowest price,
        and that they will split evenly between the two firms if they charge the
        same price. Letting x(p) represent the market demand function, this leads
        to a payoff to firm 1 of the form:
                              ECONOMIC MODELING OF STRATEGIC CHOICES       263

   This game has a similar structure to that of the Prisoner's Dilemma. If
both players cooperate, they can charge the monopoly price and each reap
half of the monopoly profits. But the temptation is always there for one
player t o cut its price slightly and thereby capture the entire market for
itself. But if both players cut price, then they are both worse off.


15.2 Economic modeling of strategic choices

 Note that the Cournot game and the Bertrand game have a radically dif-
ferent structure, even though they purport to model the same economic
phenomenon-a duopoly. In the Cournot game, the payoff t o each firm
is a continuous function of its strategic choice; in the Bertrand game, the
payoffs are discontinuous functions of the strategies. As might be expected,
this leads to quite different equilibria. Which of these models is "right"?
   There is little sense to ask which of these is the "right" model in the ab-
stract. The answer is that it depends on what you are trying t o model. It is
probably more fruitful t o ask what considerations are relevant in modeling
the set of strategies used by the agents.
   One guide is obviously empirical evidence. If observation of OPEC an-
nouncements indicates that they attempt to determine production quotas
for each member and allow the price to be set on the world oil markets,
then presumably it is more sensible t o model the strategies of the game as
being production levels rather than prices.
   Another consideration is that strategies should be something that can be
committed t o or that are difficult to change once the opponent's behavior is
observed. The games described above are "one-shot" games, but the reality
that they are supposed to describe takes place in real time. Suppose that
I pick a price for my output and then discover that my opponent has set a
slightly smaller price. In this case I can quickly revise my own price. Since
the strategic variable can be quickly modified once the opponent's play is
known, it doesn't make much sense to try to model this sort of interaction
in a one-shot game. It seems that a game with multiple stages must be used
to capture the full range of strategic behavior possible in a price-setting
game of this sort.
   On the other hand, suppose that we interpret output in the Cournot
game t o be "capacity," in the sense that it is an irreversible capital invest-
ment capable of producing the indicated amount of output. In this case,
once I discover my opponent's production level, it may be very costly to
change my own production level. Here capacity/output seems like a natural
choice for the strategic variable, even in a one-shot game.
   As in most economic modeling, there is an art to choosing a represen-
tation of the strategy choices of the game that captures an element of the
real strategic iterations, while at the same time leaving the game simple
enough to analyze.
264 GAME THEORY (Ch. 1 5 )



15.3 Solution concepts

In many games the nature of the strategic interaction suggests that a player
wants to choose a strategy that is not predictable in advance by the other
player. Consider, for example, the Matching Pennies game described above.
Here it is clear that neither player wants the other player to be able to
predict his choice accurately. Thus, it is natural to consider a random
strategy of playing heads with some probability ph and tails with some
probability pt. Such a strategy is called a mixed strategy. Strategies in
which some choice is made with probability 1 are called pure strategies.
   If R is the set of pure strategies available to Row, the set of mixed
strategies open to Row will be the set of all probability distributions over
R, where the probability of playing strategy r in R is p,. Similarly, p,
will be the probability that Column plays some strategy c. In order to
solve the game, we want to find a set of mixed strategies (p,,pc) that are,
in some sense, in equilibrium. It may be that some of the equilibrium
mixed strategies assign probability 1 to some choices, in which case they
are interpreted as pure strategies.
   The natural starting point in a search for a solution concept is standard
decision theory: we assume that each player has some probability beliefs
about the strategies that the other player might choose and that each player
chooses the strategy
                   -~
                       that maximizes his expected payoff.
   Suppose for example that the payoff to Row is u,(r,c) if row plays r
and Column plays c. We assume that Row has a subjective probability
distribution over Column's choices which we denote by (n,); see Chap-
ter 11, page 191, for the fundamentals of the idea of subjective probability.
Here n, is supposed to indicate the probability, as envisioned by Row, that
Column will make the choice c. Similarly, Column has some beliefs about
Row's behavior that we can denote by (T,).
   We allow each player to play a mixed strategy and denote Row's actual
mixed strategy by (p,) and Column's actual mixed strategy by (p,). Since
Row makes his choice without knowing Column's choice, Row's probability
that a particular outcome (r, c) will occur is p,~,. This is simply the (ob-
jective) probability that Row plays r times Row's (subjective) probability
that Column plays c. Hence, Row's objective is to choose a probability
distribution (p,) that maximizes

               Row's expected payoff =                      (r, c).
                                                      pTircuT
                                          T       C



Column, on the other hand, wishes to maximize

             Column's expected payoff =           ~pc~Tu,(
                                                         c).r ,
                                              C       r
                                                       NASH EQUILIBRIUM    265


   So far we have simply applied a standard decision-theoretic model t o this
gam~ach       player wants t o maximize his or her expected utility given his
or her beliefs. Given my beliefs about what the other player might do, I
choose the strategy that maximizes my expected utility.
    In this model the beliefs that I hold about the other player's strategic
choices are exogenous variabIes. However, now we add an additional twist
t o the standard decision model and ask what kinds of beliefs are reasonable
to hold about the other person's behavior? After all, each player in the
game knows that the other player is out to maximize his own payoff, and
each should use that information in determining what are reasonable beliefs
to have about the other player's behavior.


15.4 Nash equilibrium

In game theory we take as given the proposition that each player is out t o
maximize his own payoff, and, furthermore, that each player knows that
this is the goal of each other player. Hence, in determining what might be
reasonable beliefs for me to hold about what other players might do, I have
to ask what they might believe about what I will do. In the expected payoff
formulas given at the end of the last section, Row's behavior-how likely
he is t o play each of his strategies-is represented by the probability dis-
tribution (p,) and Column's beliefs about Row's behavior are represented
by the (subjective) probability distribution (T,).
   A natural consistency requirement is that each player's belief about the
other player's choices coincides with the actual choices the other player
intends to make. Expectations that are consistent with actual frequencies
are sometimes called rational expectations. A Nash equilibrium is a
certain kind of rational expectations equilibrium. More formally:

Nash equilibrium. A Nash equilibrium consists of probability beliefs
(T,, T,) over strategies, and probability of choosing strategies (p,, p,), such
that:

  I ) the beliefs are correct: p, = T, and p, = T, for all r and c; and,

  2) each player is choosing (p,) and (p,) so as to maximize his expected
utility given his beliefs.

   In this definition it is apparent that a Nash equilibrium is an equilibrium
in actions and beliefs. In equilibrium each player correctly foresees how
likely the other player is to make various choices, and the beliefs of the two
players are mutually consistent.
   A more conventional definition of a Nash equilibrium is that it is a pair
of mixed strategies (p,,p,) such that each agent's choice maximizes his
266 CAME THEORY (Ch. 15)


expected utility, given the strategy of the other agent. This is equivalent
to the definition we use, but it is misleading since the distinction between
the beliefs of the agents and the actions of the agents is blurred. We've
tried to be very careful in distinguishing these two concepts.
   One particularly interesting special case of a Nash equilibrium is a Nash
equilibrium in p u r e strategies, which is simply a Nash equilibrium in
which the probability of playing a particular strategy is 1 for each player.
That is:


P u r e strategies.    A Nash equilibrium in p u r e strategies is a
pair (r*,c*) such that u,(r*, c*)   >
                                  u,(T, c*) for all Row strategies r, and
           >
uc(r*,c*) uc(r*,c) for all Column strategies c.


  A Nash equilibrium is a minimal consistency requirement to put on a
pair of strategies: if Row believes that Column will play c*, then Row's
best reply is r* and similarly for Column. No player would find it in his or
her interest to deviate unilaterally from a Nash equilibrium strategy.
   If a set of strategies is not a Nash equilibrium then at least one player is
not consistently thinking through the behavior of the other player. That
is, one of the players must expect the other player not to act in his own
self-interest-ontradictingthe original hypothesis of the analysis.
   An equilibrium concept is often thought of as a "rest point" of some
adjustment process. One interpretation of Nash equilibrium is that it is
the adjustment process of "thinking through" the incentives of the other
player. Row might think: "If I think that Column is going to play some
strategy cl then the best response for me is to play rl. But if Column
thinks that I will play r l , then the best thing for him to do is to play some
other strategy ca. But if Column is going to play ca, then my best response
is to play r a . . ." and so on. A Nash equilibrium is then a set of beliefs and
strategies in which each player's beliefs about what the other player will
do are consistent with the other player's actual choice.
   Sometimes the "thinking through" adjustment process described in the
preceding paragraph is interpreted as an actual adjustment process in which
each player experiments with different strategies in an attempt to under-
stand the other player's choices. Although it is clear that such experi-
mentation and learning goes on in real-life strategic interaction, this is,
strictly speaking, not a valid interpretation of the Nash equilibrium con-
cept. The reason is that if each player knows that the game is going to
be repeated some number of times, then each player can plan to base his
behavior at time t on observed behavior of the other player up to time t.
In this case the correct notion of Nash equilibrium is a sequence of plays
that is a best response (in some sense) to a sequence of my opponent's
plays.
                                                    NASH EQUILIBRIUM   267



EXAMPLE: Calculating a Nash equilibrium

The following game is known as the "Battle of the Sexes." The story
behind the game goes something like this. Rhonda Row and Calvin Col-
umn are discussing whether to take microeconomics or macroeconomics
this semester. Rhonda gets utility 2 and Calvin gets utility 1 if they both
take micro; the payoffs are reversed if they both take macro. If they take
different courses, they both get utility 0.
  Let us calculate all the Nash equilibria of this game. First, we look for
the Nash equilibria in pure strategies. This simply involves a systematic
examination of the best responses to various strategy choices. Suppose
that Column thinks that Row will play Top. Column gets 1 from playing
Left and 0 from playing Right, so Left is Column's best response to Row
playing Top. On the other hand, if Column plays Left, then it is easy to
see that it is optimal for Row to play Top. This line of reasoning shows
that (Top, Left) is a Nash equilibrium. A similar argument shows that
(Bottom, Right) is a Nash equilibrium.
                                          I
                                          '




                       The Battle of the Sexes
                                                                              Table
                                                  Calvin                      15.3
                                      Left (micro)    Right (macro)
                Top (micro)               &L               0,O
        Rhonda Bottom (macro)              0,o             .Lg


   We can also solve this game systematically by writing the maximization
problem that each agent has to solve and examining the first-order con-
ditions. Let (pt,pb) be the probabilities with which Row plays Top and
Bottom, and define (pl,p,) in a similar manner. Then Row's problem is



                  such that pt + pb = 1
                            Pt > 0
                            pb > 0.
Let A, pt, and pb be the Kuhn-Tucker multipliers on the constraints, so
that the Lagrangian takes the form:
268 CAME THEORY (Ch. 1 5 )

Differentiating with respect to pt and pb, we see that the Kuhn-Tucker
conditions for Row are



Since we already know the pure strategy solutions, we only consider the
case where pt > 0 and pg > 0. The complementary slackness conditions
                                                       +
then imply that pt = pb = 0. Using the fact that pt pb = 1, we easily see
that Row will find it optimal to play a mixed strategy when pl = 113 and
p, = 213.
   Following the same procedure for Column, we find that pt = 213 and
pb = 113. The expected payoff to each player from this mixed strategy can
be easily computed by plugging these numbers into the objective function.
In this case the expected payoff is 213 to each player. Note that each player
would prefer either of the pure strategy equilibria to the mixed strategy
since the payoffs are higher for each player.


15.5 Interpretation of mixed strategies                         ,,

It is sometimes difficult to give a behavioral interpretation to the idea
of a mixed strategy. For some games, such as Matching Pennies, it is
clear that mixed strategies are the only sensible equilibrium. But for other
games of economic interest-.g.,      a duopoly gamemixed strategies seem
unrealistic.
   In addition to this unrealistic nature of mixed strategies in some contexts,
there is another difficulty on purely logical grounds. Consider again the
example of the mixed strategy in the Battle of the Sexes. The mixed
strategy equilibrium in this game has the property that if Row is playing
his equilibrium mixed strategy, the expected payoff to Column from playing
either of his pure strategies must be the same as the expected payoff from
playing his equilibrium mixed strategy. The easiest way to see this is to
look at the first-order conditions (15.1). Since 2pl = p,, the expected payoff
to playing top is the same as the expected payoff to playing bottom.
   But this is no accident. It must always be the case that for any mixed
strategy equilibrium, if one party believes that the other player will play the
equilibrium mixed strategy, then he is indifferent as to whether he plays
his equilibrium mixed strategy, or any pure strategy that is part of his
mixed strategy. The logic is straightforward: if some pure strategy that is
part of the equilibrium mixed strategy had a higher expected payoff than
some other component of the equilibrium mixed strategy, then it would
pay to increase the frequency with which one played the strategy with the
higher expected payoff. But if all of the pure strategies that are played with
positive probability in a mixed strategy have the same expected payoff, this
must also be the expected payoff of the mixed strategy. And this in turn
                                                        REPEATED GAMES    269


implies that the agent is indifferent as to which pure strategy he plays or
whether he plays the mixed strategy. This "degeneracy" arises since the
expected utility function is linear in probabilities. One would like there to
be some more compelling reason to "enforce" the mixed strategy outcome.
   In some settings this may not pose a serious problem. Suppose that you
are part of a large group of people who meet each other randomly and
play Matching Pennies once with each opponent. Suppose that initially
everyone is playing the unique Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies of
(i,i).   Eventually some of the players tire of playing the mixed strategy
and decide to play heads or tails all of the time. If the number of people
who decide to play Heads all the time equals the number who decide to play
Tails, then nothing significant has changed in any agent's choice problem:
each agent would still rationally believe that his opponent has a 50:50
chance of playing Heads or Tails.
  In this way each member of the population is playing a pure strategy, but
in a given game the players have no way of knowing which pure strategy
their opponent is playing. This interpretation of mixed strategy prob-
abilities as being population frequencies is common in modeling animal
behavior.
   Another way to interpret mixed strategy equilibria is to consider a given
individual's choice of whether to play Heads or play Tails in a one-shot
game. This choice may be thought to depend on idiosyncratic factors that
cannot be determined by opponents. Suppose for example that one calls
Heads if you're in a "heads mood" and one calls tails if you're in a "tails
mood." You may be able to observe your own mood, but your opponent
cannot. Hence, from the viewpoint of each player, the other person's strat-
egy is random, even though one's own strategy is deterministic. What
matters about a player's mixed strategy is the uncertainty it creates in the
other players of the game.


15.6 Repeated games

We indicated above that it was not appropriate to expect that the outcome
of a repeated game with the same players as simply being a repetition of
the one-shot game. This is because the strategy space of the repeated game
is much larger: each player can determine his or her choice at some point
as a function of the entire history of the game up until that point. Since
my opponent can modify his behavior based on my history of choices, I
must take this influence into account when making my own choices.
   Let us analyze this in the context of the simple Prisoner's Dilemma game
described earlier. Here it is in the "long-run" interest of both players to
try to get to the (Cooperate, Cooperate) solution. So it might be sensible
for one player to try to "signal" to the other that he is willing to "be nice"
and play cooperate on the first move of the game. It is in the short-run
270 GAME THEORY (Ch. 15)


interest of the other player to Defect, of course, but is this really in his
long-run interest? He might reason that if he defects, the other player
may lose patience and simply play Defect himself from then on. Thus, the
second player might lose in the long run from playing the short-run optimal
strategy. What lies behind this reasoning is the fact that a move that I
make now may have repercussions in the f u t u r e t h e other player's future
choices may depend on my current choices.
   Let us ask whether the strategy of (Cooperate, Cooperate) can be a Nash
equilibrium of the repeated Prisoner's Dilemma. First we consider the case
of where each player knows that the game will be repeated a fixed number
of times. Consider the reasoning of the players just before the last round
of play. Each reasons that, at this point, they are playing a one-shot game.
Since there is no future left on the last move, the standard logic for Nash
equilibrium applies and both parties Defect.
   Now consider the move before the last. Here it seems that it might
pay each of the players to cooperate in order to signal that they are "nice
guys" who will cooperate again in the next and final move. But we've
just seen that when the next move comes around, each player will want
to play Defect. Hence there is no advantage to cooperating on the next
to the last m o v e a s long as both players believe that the other player
will Defect on the final move, there is no advantage to try to influence
future behavior by being nice on the penultimate move. The same logic
of backwards induction works for two moves before the end, and so on.
In a repeated Prisoner's Dilemma with a known number of repetitions, the
Nash equilibrium is to Defect in every round.
   The situation is quite different in a repeated game with an infinite num-
ber of repetitions. In this case, at each stage it is known that the game
will be repeated at least one more time and therefore there will be some
(potential) benefits to cooperation. Let's see how this works in the case of
the Prisoner's Dilemma.
   Consider a game that consists of an infinite number of repetitions of the
Prisoner's Dilemma described earlier. The strategies in this repeated game
are sequences of functions that indicate whether each player will Cooperate
or Defect at a particular stage as a function of the history of the game up
to that stage. The payoffs in the repeated game are the discounted sums
of the payoffs at each stage; that is, if a player gets a payoff at time t of
ut, his payoff in the repeated game is taken to be CEO           +
                                                            ut/(l T ) ~ ,
                                                                        where
r is the discount rate.
   I claim that as long as the discount rate is not too high there exists a
Nash equilibrium pair of strategies such that each player finds it in his
interest to cooperate at each stage. In fact, it is easy to exhibit an explicit
example of such strategies. Consider the following strategy: "Cooperate
on the current move unless the other player defected on the last move. If
the other player defected on the last move, then Defect forever." This is
sometimes called a punishment strategy, for obvious reasons: if a player
                                      REFINEMENTS OF NASH EQUILIBRIUM       271


defects, he will be punished forever with a low payoff.
   To show that a pair of punishment strategies constitutes a Nash equi-
librium, we simply have to show that if one player plays the punishment
strategy the other player can do no better than playing the punishment
strategy. Suppose that the players have cooperated up until move T and
consider what would happen if a player decided to Defect on this move.
Using the numbers from the Prisoner's Dilemma example on page 261, he
would get an immediate payoff of 4, but he would also doom himself to an
infinite stream of payments of 1. The discounted value of such a stream of
                                                                    +
payments is l / r , so his total expected payoff from Defecting is 4 l / ~ .
   On the other hand, his expected payoff from continuing to cooperate is
 +                                                          +
3 3/r. Continuing to cooperate is preferred as long as 3 317- > 4 l/r,  +
which reduces to requiring that r < 2. As long as this condition is satisfied,
the punishment strategy forms a Nash equilibrium: if one party plays the
punishment strategy, the other party will also want to play it, and neither
party can gain by unilaterally deviating from this choice.
   This construction is quite robust. Essentially the same argument works
for any payoffs that exceed the payoffs from (Defect, Defect). A famous
result known as the Folk Theorem asserts precisely this: in a repeated Pris-
oner's Dilemma any payoff larger than the payoff received if both parties
consistently defect can be supported as a Nash equilibrium. The proof is
more-or-less along the lines of the construction given above.


EXAMPLE: Maintaining a cartel

Consider a simple repeated duopoly which yields profits (T,, T,) if both
firms choose to play a Cournot game and (nj.,.n;.) if both firms produce
the level of output that maximizes their joint profits-that is, they act as a
cartel. It is well-known that the levels of output that maximize joint profits
are typically not Nash equilibria in a single-period g a m ~ a c h  producer
has an incentive to dump extra output if he believes that the other producer
will keep his output constant. However, as long as the discount rate is not
too high, the joint profit-maximizing solution will be a Nash equilibrium of
the repeated game. The appropriate punishment strategy is for each firm
to produce the cartel output unless the other firm deviates, in which case
it will produce the Cournot output forever. An argument similar to the
Prisoner's Dilemma argument shows that this is a Nash equilibrium.


15.7 Refinements of Nash equilibrium

The Nash equilibrium concept seems like a reasonable definition of an equi-
librium of a game. As with any equilibrium concept, there are two questions
272 GAME THEORY (Ch. 15)


of immediate interest: 1) will a Nash equilibrium generally exist; and 2)
will the Nash equilibrium be unique?
   Existence, luckily, is not a problem. Nash (1950) showed that with a
h i t e number of agents and a finite number of pure strategies, an equilib-
rium will always exist. It may, of course, be an equilibrium involving mixed
strategies.
   Uniqueness, however, is very unlikely t o occur in general. We have al-
ready seen that there may be several Nash equilibria t o a game. Game
theorists have invested a substantial amount of effort into discovering fur-
ther criteria that can be used t o choose among Nash equilibria. These
criteria are known as refinements of the concept of Nash equilibrium,
and we will investigate a few of them below.


15.8 Dominant strategies             "

Let T I and rz be two of Row's strategies. We say that T I strictly dom-
inates r 2 for Row if the payoff from strategy rl is strictly larger than
the payoff for rz no matter what choice Column makes. The strategy rl
weakly dominates 7-2 if the payoff from rl is a t least as large for all
choices Column might make and strictly larger for some choice.
   A dominant strategy equilibrium is a choice of strategies by each
player such that each strategy (weakly) dominates every other strategy
available t o that player.
   One particularly interesting game that has a dominant strategy equilib-
rium is the Prisoner's Dilemma in which the dominant strategy equilibrium
is (Defect, Defect). If I believe that the other agent will Cooperate, then
it is to my advantage to Defect; and if I believe that the other agent will
Defect, it is still to my advantage t o Defect.
   Clearly, a dominant strategy equilibrium is a Nash equilibrium, but not
all Nash equilibria are dominant strategy equilibria. A dominant strategy
equilibrium, should one exist, is an especially compelling solution t o the
game, since there is a unique optimal choice for each player.


15.9 Elimination of dominated strategies

When there is no dominant strategy equilibrium, we have t o resort to the
idea of a Nash equilibrium. But typically there will be more than one Nash
equilibrium. Our problem then is t o try to eliminate some of the Nash
equilibria as being "unreasonable."
   One sensible belief t o have about players' behavior is that it would be
unreasonable for them t o play strategies that are dominated by other strate-
gies. This suggests that when given a game, we should first eliminate all
strategies that are dominated and then calculate the Nash equilibria of
                                                     SEQUENTIAL GAMES     273


the remaining game. This procedure is called elimination of dominated
strategies; it can sometimes result in a significant reduction in the number
of Nash equilibria.
   For example consider the game



                 A game with dominated strategies
                                                                                Table
                                                                                15.4
                                            Column
                                          Left   Right
                               TOP
                       Row Bottom




   Note that there are two pure strategy Nash equilibria, (Top, Left) and
(Bottom, Right). However, the strategy Right weakly dominates the strat-
egy Left for the Column player. If the Row agent esumes that Column
will never play his dominated strategy, the only equilibrium for the game
is (Bottom, Right).
   Elimination of strictly dominated strategies is generally agreed t o be
an acceptable procedure to simplify the analysis of a game. Elimination
of weakly dominated strategies is more problematic; there are examples
in which eliminating weakly dominated strategies appears to change the
strategic nature of the game in a significant way.



15.1 0 Sequential games

The games described so far in this chapter have all had a very simple
dynamic structure: they were either one-shot games or a repeated sequence
of one-shot games. They also had a very simple information structure: each
player in the game knew the other player's payoffs and available strategies,
but did not know in advance the other player's actual choice of strategies.
Another way to say this is that up until now we have restricted our attention
to games with simultaneous moves.
   But many games of interest do not have this structure. In many situ-
ations at least some of the choices are made sequentially, and one player
may know the other player's choice before he has to make his own choice.
The analysis of such games is of considerable interest to economists since
many economic games have this structure: a monopolist gets to observe
consumer demand behavior before it produces output, or a duopolist may
         274 CAME THEORY (Ch 15)



                  The payoff matrix of a simultaneous-move game.
 Table
 15.5
                                                     Column
                                                   Left   Right
                                      TOP           1,9       1,9
                                 Row Bottom         0,O       21


         observe his opponent's capital investment before making its own output
         decisions, etc. The analysis of such games requires some new concepts.
            Consider for example, the simple game depicted in Table 15.5. It is easy
         to verify that there are two pure strategy Nash equilibria in this game,
         (Top, Left) and (Bottom, Right). Implicit in this description of this game
         is the idea that both players make their choices simultaneously, without
         knowledge of the choice that the other player has made. But suppose that
         we consider the game in which Row must choose first, and Column gets to
         make his choice after observing Row's behavior.
            In order to describe such a sequential game it is necessary to introduce
         a new tool, the game tree. This is simply a diagram that indicates the
         choices that each player can make at each point in time. The payoffs to
         each player are indicated at the "leaves" of the tree, as in Figure 15.1. This
         game tree is part of the a description of the game in extensive form.




                                                            13
          Row
                                                            0,o




                                                            2.1


Figure          A game tree. This illustrates the payoffs to the previous game
15.1            when Row gets to move first.
                                                           SEQUENTIAL GAMES       275


   The nice thing about the tree diagram of the game is that it indicates the
dynamic structure of the g a m e t h a t some choices are made before others.
A choice in the game corresponds t o the choice of a branch of the tree.
Once a choice has been made, the players are in a subgarne consisting of
the strategies and payoffs available to them from then on.
   It is straightforward to calculate the Nash equilibria in each of the pos-
sible subgames, particularly in this case since the example is so simple. If
Row chooses top, he effectively chooses the very simple subgame in which
Column has the only remaining move. Column is indifferent between his
two moves, so that Row will definitely end up with a payoff of 1 if he
chooses Top.
   If Row chooses Bottom, it will be optimal for Column to choose Right,
which gives a payoff of 2 to Row. Since 2 is larger than 1, Row is clearly
better off choosing Bottom than Top. Hence the sensible equilibrium for
this game is (Bottom, Right). This is, of course, one of the Nash equilibria
in the simultaneous-move game. If Column announces that he will choose
Right, then Row's optimal response is Bottom, and if Row announces that
he will choose Bottom then Column's optimal response is Right.
   But what happened to the other equilibrium, (Top, Left)? If Row be-
lieves that Column will choose Left, then his optimal choice is certainly to
choose Top. But why should Row believe that Column will actually choose
Left? Once Row chooses Bottom, the optimal choice in the resulting sub-
game is for Column to choose Right. A choice of Left a t this point is not
an equilibrium choice in the relevant subgame.
   In this example, only one of the two Nash equilibria satisfies the condition
that it is not only an overall equilibrium, but also an equilibrium in each
of the subgames. A Nash equilibrium with this property is known as a
subgame perfect equilibrium.
   It is quite easy to calculate subgame-perfect equilibria, at least in the
kind of games that we have been examining. One simply does a "backwards
induction" starting a t the last move of the game. The player who has the
last move has a simple optimization problem, with no strategic ramifica-
tions, so this is an easy problem to solve. The player who makes the second
t o the last move can look ahead to see how the player with the last move
will respond to his choices, and so on. The mode of analysis is similar to
that of dynamic programming; see Chapter 19, page 359. Once the game
has been understood through this backwards induction, the agents play it
going forward^.^
   The extensive form of the game is also capable of modeling situations
where some of the moves are sequential and some are simultaneous. The
necessary concept is that of an information set. The information set of


  Compare to Kierkegaard (1938): "It is perfectly true, as philosophers say, that life
  must be understood backwards. But they forget the other proposition, that it must
  be lived forwards." [465]
         276 GAME THEORY (Ch. 15)


         an agent is the set of all nodes of the tree that cannot be differentiated
         by the agent. For example, the simultaneous-move game depicted a t the
         beginning of this section can be represented by the game tree in Figure 15.2.
         In this figure, the shaded area indicates that Column cannot differentiate
         which of these decisions Row made a t the time when Column must make
         his own decision. Hence, it is just as if the choices are made simultaneously.




         Row




Figure         Information set. This is the extensive form to the original
15.2           simultaneous-move game. The shaded information set indicates
               that Column is not aware of which choice Row made when he
               makes his own choice.


            Thus the extensive form of a game can be used to model everything in
         the strategic form plus information about the sequence of choices and in-
         formation sets. In this sense the extensive form is a more powerful concept
         than the strategic form, since it contains more detailed information about
         the strategic interactions of the agents. It is the presence of this addi-
         tional information that helps to eliminate some of the Nash equilibria as
         "unreasonable."


         EXAMPLE: A simple bargaining model

         Two players, A and B, have $1 to divide between them. They agree t o
         spend at most three days negotiating over the division. The first day, A
         will make an offer, B either accepts or comes back with a counteroffer the
         next day, and on the third day A gets to make one final offer. If they
         cannot reach an agreement in three days, both players get zero.
                                                            SEQUENTIAL GAMES       277


   A and B differ in their degree of impatience: A discounts payoffs in the
future a t a rate of a per day, and B discounts payoffs at a rate of P per
day. Finally, we assume that if a player is indifferent between two offers,
he will accept the one that is most preferred by his opponent. This idea
is that the opponent could offer some arbitrarily small amount that would
make the player strictly prefer one choice, and that this assumption allows
us t o approximate such an "arbitrarily small amount" by zero. It turns
out that there is a unique subgame perfect equilibrium of this bargaining
game.3
   As suggested above, we start our analysis a t the end of the game, right
before the last day. At this point A can make a take-it-or-leave-it offer t o
B. Clearly, the optimal thing for A to do at this point is t o offer B the
smallest possible amount that he would accept, which, by assumption, is
zero. So if the game actually lasts three days, A would get 1 and B would
get zero (i.e., an arbitrarily small amount).
   Now go back t o the previous move, when B gets to propose a division.
At this point B should realize that A can guarantee himself 1 on the next
move by simply rejecting B1s offer. A dollar next period is worth a to
A this period, so any offer less than (Y would be sure to be rejected. B
certainly prefers 1 - a now to zero next period, so he should rationally
offer a t o A, which A will then accept. So if the game ends on the second
move, A gets a and B gets 1 - a .
   Now move to the first day. At this point A gets t o make the offer and he
realizes that B can get 1- a if he simply waits until the second day. Hence
 A must offer a payoff that has at least this present value to B in order to
avoid delay. Thus he offers P ( l - a ) to B . B finds this (just) acceptable
and the game ends. The final outcome is that the game ends on the first
move with A receiving 1- /?(l - (Y)and B receiving /?(l- a ) .
   Figure 15.3A illustrates this process for the case where a = P < 1. The
outermost diagonal line shows the possible payoff patterns on the first day,
                                      +
namely all payoffs of the form X A x~ = 1. The next diagonal line moving
towards the origin shows the present value of the payoffs if the game ends
                             +
in the second period: X A X B = a . The diagonal line closest to the origin
shows the present value of the payoffs if the game ends in the third period;
this equation for this line is X A + X B = a*.The right angled path depicts the
minimum acceptable divisions each period, leading up to the final subgame
perfect equilibrium. Figure 15.3B shows how the same process looks with
more stages in the negotiation.
   It is natural to let the horizon go t o infinity and ask what happens in the
infinite game. It turns out that the subgame perfect equilibrium division



  This is a simplified version of the Rubinstein-Stbhl bargaining model; see the refer-
  ences at the end of the chapter for more detailed information.
         278 CAME THEORY (Ch. 15)




Figure        A bargaining game. The heavy line connects together the
15.3          equilibrium outcomes in the subgames. The point on the outer-
              most line is the subgame-perfect equilibrium.


                                                  1-P
                                    payoff to A = -
                                                  1-ap
                                    payoff to B = P O - 'u)
                                                   1-a/? '
         Note that if a = 1 and ,b < 1, then player A receives the entire payoff, in
         accord with the principal expressed in the Gospels: "Let patience have her
         [subgame] perfect work." (James 1:4).


         15.1 1 Repeated games and subgame perfection

         The idea of subgame perfection eliminates Nash equilibria that involve
         players threatening actions that are not credible--i.e., they are not in the
         interest of the players to carry out. For example, the Punishment Strategy
         described earlier is not a subgame perfect equilibrium. If one player actually
         deviates from the (Cooperate, Cooperate) path, then it is not necessarily
         in the interest of the other player to actually defect forever in response.
         It may seem reasonable to punish the other player for defection to some
         degree, but punishing forever seems extreme.
            A somewhat less harsh strategy is known as Tit-for-Tat: start out cooper-
         ating on the first play and on subsequent plays do whatever your opponent
         did on the previous play. In this strategy, a player is punished for defec-
         tion, but he is only punished once. In this sense Tit-for-Tat is a "forgiving"
         strategy.
            Although the punishment strategy is not subgame perfect for the re-
         peated Prisoner's Dilemma, there are strategies that can support the co-
         operative solution that are subgame perfect. These strategies are not easy
         to describe, but they have the character of the West Point honor code:
         each player agrees to punish the other for defecting, and also punish the
         other for failing to punish another player for defecting, and so on. The fact
                                   GAMES WITH INCOMPLETE INFORMATION        279


that you will be punished if you don't punish a defector is what makes it
subgame perfect to carry out the punishments.
   Unfortunately, the same sort of strategies can support many other out-
comes in the repeated Prisoner's Dilemma. The Folk Theorem asserts
that essentially all distributions of utility in a repeated one-shot game can
be equilibria of the repeated game.
   This excess supply of equilibria is troubling. In general, the larger the
strategy space, the more equilibria there will be, since there will be more
ways for players to "threaten" retaliation for defecting from a given set
of strategies. In order to eliminate the "undesirable" equilibria, we need
to find some criterion for eliminating strategies. A natural criterion is to
eliminate strategies that are "too complex." Although some progress has
been made in this direction, the idea of complexity is an elusive one, and
it has been hard to come up with an entirely satisfactory definition.


15.1 2 Games with incomplete information

Up until now we have been investigating games of complete information.
In particular, each agent has been assumed to know the payoffs of the
other player, and each player knows that the other agent knows this, etc.
In many situations, this is not an appropriate assumption. If one agent
doesn't know the payoffs of the other agent, then the Nash equilibrium
doesn't make much sense. However, there is a way of looking at games of
incomplete information due to Harsanyi (1967) that allows for a systematic
analysis of their properties.
   The key to the Harsanyi approach is to subsume all of the uncertainty
that one agent may have about another into a variable known as the agent's
type. For example, one agent may be uncertain about another agent's
valuation of some good, about his or her risk aversion and so on. Each
type of player is regarded as a different player and each agent has some
prior probability distribution defined over the different types of agents.
   A Bayes-Nash equilibrium of this game is then a set of strategies
for each type of player that maximizes the expected value of each type of
player, given the strategies pursued by the other players. This is essentially
the same definition as in the definition of Nash equilibrium, except for the
additional uncertainty involved about the type of the other player. Each
player knows that the other player is chosen from a set of possible types,
but doesn't know exactly which one he is playing. Note in order to have a
complete description of an equilibrium we must have a list of strategies for
all types of players, not just the actual types in a particular situation, since
each individual player doesn't know the actual types of the other players
and has to consider all possibilities.
  In a simultaneous-move game, this definition of equilibrium is adequate.
In a sequential game it is reasonable to allow the players to update their
280 CAME THEORY (Ch. 15)


beliefs about the types of the other players based on the actions they have
observed. Normally, we assume that this updating is done in a manner
consistent with Bayes' rule.4 Thus, if one player observes the other choosing
some strategy s, the first player should revise his beliefs about what type
the other player is by determining how likely it is that s would be chosen
by the various types.


EXAMPLE: A sealed-bid auction
Consider a simple sealed-bid auction for an item in which there are two
bidders. Each player makes an independent bid without knowing the other
player's bid and the item will be awarded to the person with the highest
bid. Each bidder knows his own valuation of the item being auctioned, v,
but neither knows the other's valuation. However, each player believes that
the other person's valuation of the item is uniformly distributed between 0
and 1. (And each person knows that each person believes this, etc.)
   In this game, the type of the player is simply his valuation. Therefore, a
Bayes-Nash equilibrium to this game will be a function, b(v), that indicates
the optimal bid, b, for a player of type v. Given the symmetric nature of
the game, we look for an equilibrium where each player follows an identical
strategy.
   It is natural to guess that the function b(v) is strictly increasing; i.e.,
higher valuations lead to higher bids. Therefore, we can let V(b) be its
inverse function so that V(b) gives us the valuation of someone who bids
b. When one player bids some particular b, his probability of winning is
the probability that the other player's bid is less than b. But this is simply
the probability that the other player's valuation is less than V(b). Since
v is uniformly distributed between 0 and 1, the probability that the other
player's valuation is less than V(b) is V(b).
   Hence, if a player bids b when his valuation is v, his expected payoff is


The first term is the expected consumer's surplus if he has the highest bid;
the second term is the zero surplus he receives if he is outbid. The optimal
bid must maximize this expression, so
                             (V- b)V (b) - V(b) = 0.
                                       f




For each value of v, this equation determines the optimal bid for the player
as a function of v. Since V(b) is by hypothesis the function that describes
the relationship between the optimal bid and the valuation, we must have
                             (V(b) - b)V (b) EZ V(b)
                                           f




for all b.

  See Chapter 11, page 191 for a discussion of Bayes' rule.
                                 DISCUSSION OF BAYES-NASH EQUILIBRIUM    281


  The solution to this differential equation is



where C is a constant of integration. (Check this!) In order t o determine
this constant of integration we note that when v = 0 we must have b = 0,
since the optimal bid when the valuation is zero must be 0. Substituting
this into the solution to the differential equation gives us




which implies C = 0. It follows that V ( b )= 2b, or b = v/2, is a Bayes-Nash
equilibrium for the simple auction. That is, it is a Bayes-Nash equilibrium
for each player t o bid half of his valuation.
   The way that we arrived a t the solution to this game is reasonably stan-
dard. Essentially, we guessed that the optimal bidding function was invert-
ible and then derived the differential equation that it must satisfy. As it
turned out, the resulting bid function had the desired property. One weak-
ness of this approach is that it only exhibits one particular equilibrium to
the Bayesian g a m e t h e r e could in principle be many others.
   As it happens, in this particular game, the solution that we calculated
is unique, but this need not happen in general. In particular, in games
of incomplete information it may well pay for some players t o try t o hide
their true type. For example, one type may try to play the same strategy
as some other type. In this situation the function relating type t o strategy
is not invertible and the analysis is much more complex.



15.1 3 Discussion of Bayes-Nash equilibrium

The idea of Bayes-Nash equilibrium is an ingenious one, but perhaps it
is too ingenious. The problem is that the reasoning involved in comput-
ing Bayes-Nash equilibria is often very involved. Although it is perhaps
not unreasonable that purely rational players would play according t o the
Bayes-Nash theory, there is considerable doubt about whether real players
are able to make the necessary calculations.
   In addition, there is a problem with the predictions of the model. The
choice that each player makes depends crucially on his beliefs about the
distribution of various types in the population. Different beliefs about
the frequency of different types leads to different optimal behavior. Since
we generally don't observe players beliefs about the prevalence of various
types of players, we typically won't be able t o check the predictions of the
model. Ledyard (1986) has shown that essentially any pattern of play is a
Bayes-Nash equilibrium for some pattern of beliefs.
282 GAME THEORY (Ch. 15)


   Nash equilibrium, in its original formulation, puts a consistency require-
ment on the beliefs of the agents-nly those beliefs compatible with max-
imizing behavior were allowed. But as soon as we allow there to be many
types of players with different utility functions, this idea loses much of its
force. Nearly any pattern of behavior can be consistent with some pattern
of beliefs.


Notes

The concept of Nash equilibrium comes from Nash (1951). The concept
of Bayesian equilibrium is due to Harsanyi (1967). More detailed treat-
ments of the simple bargaining model may be found in Binmore & Das-
gupta (1987).
   This chapter is just a bare-bones introduction to game theory; most stu-
dents will want to study this subject in more detail. Luckily several fine
treatments have recently become available that provide a more rigorous
and detailed treatment. For review articles see Aumann (1987), Myer-
son (1986), and Tirole (1988). For book-length treatments see the works
by Kreps (1990), Binmore (1991), Myerson (1991), Rasmusen (1989), and
Fudenberg & Tirole (1991).


Exercises

15.1. Calculate all the Nash equilibria in the game of Matching Pennies.

15.2. In a finitely repeated Prisoner's Dilemma game we showed that it was
a Nash equilibrium to defect every round. Show that, in fact, this is the
dominant strategy equilibrium.

15.3. What are the Nash equilibria of the following game after one elimi-
nates dominated strategies?

                                           Column
                              Left         Middle   Right
                   TOD 1 3 , 3         1    0,3   1 0,O       I
              Row ~ i d d l e 3; 0          2,2      0,2
                  Bottom      0,O           2,O      1,l



15.4. Calculate the expected payoff to each player in the simple auction
game described in the text if each player follows the Bayes-Nash equilibrium
strategy, conditional on his value v.
15.5. Consider the game matrix given here.
                                       Column
                                    Left    Right

                          Bottom

   (a) If (top, left) is a dominant strategy equilibrium, then what inequal-
ities must hold among a, . . . , h?
   (b) If (top, left) is a Nash equilibrium, then which of the above inequal-
ities must be satisfied?

  (c) If (top, left) is a dominant strategy equilibrium, must it be a Nash
equilibrium?
15.6. Two California teenagers Bill and Ted are playing Chicken. Bill drives
his hot rod south down a one-lane road, and Ted drives his hot rod north
along the same road. Each has two strategies: Stay or Swerve. If one
player chooses Swerve he looses face; if both Swerve, they both lose face.
However, if both choose Stay, they are both killed. The payoff matrix for
Chicken looks like this:
                                          Column
                                       Left     Rinht
                                      -3,-3
                    Row Bottom

  (a) Find all pure strategy equilibria.
  (b) Find all mixed strategy equilibria.

  (c) What is the probability that both teenagers will survive?
15.7. In a repeated, symmetric duopoly the payoff to both firms is -n; if
they produce the level of output that maximizes their joint profits and n-,
if they produce the Cournot level of output. The maximum payoff that
one player can get if the other chooses the joint profit maximizing output
is n-d. The discount rate is r . The players adopt the punishment strategy
of reverting to the Cournot game if either player defects from the joint
profit-maximizing strategy. How large can r be?
15.8. Consider the game shown below:

                                           Column
                                  Left     Middle Right
                   TOD 1           1,O    I 1.2 1 2,-1        1
              Row ~ i d d l e '    1;1       1,O   0,-1
                  Bottom          -3,-3     -3,-3 -3,-3
284 GAME THEORY (Ch. 15)




  (a) Which of Row's strategies is strictly dominated no matter what
Column does?

  (b) Which of Row's strategies is weakly dominated?

  (c) Which of Column's strategies is strictly dominated no matter what
Row does?

   (d) If we eliminate Column's dominated strategies, are any of Row's
strategies weakly dominated?

15.9. Consider the following coordination game
                                         Column
                                      Left    Right
                           TOP        2'2   ( -1,-1
                    Row Bottom       -1,-1  I  1'1

  (a) Calculate all the pure strategy equilibria of this game.

  (b) Do any of the pure strategy equilibria dominate any of the others?

  (c) Suppose that Row moves first and commits to either Top or Bottom.
Are the strategies you described above still Nash equilibria?

  (d) What are the subgame perfect equilibria of this game?
                      CHAPTER            16
             OLIGOPOLY

Oligopoly is the study of market interactions with a small number of
firms. The modern study of this subject is grounded almost entirely in
the theory of games discussed in the last chapter. This is, of course, a
very natural development. Many of the earlier ad hoc specifications of
strategic market interactions have been substantially clarified by using the
concepts of game theory. In this chapter we will investigate oligopoly theory
primarily, though not exclusively, from this perspective.


16.1 Cournot equilibrium
We begin with the classic model of C o u r n o t equilibrium, already men-
tioned as an example in the last chapter. Consider two firms which produce
a homogeneous product with output levels yl and y2, and thus an aggre-
                       +
gate output of Y = yl y2. The market price associated with t,his output
                                                           +
(the inverse demand function) is taken to be p(Y) E p(yl y2). Firm i has
a cost function given by ci(yi) for i = 1,2.
   Firm 1's maximization problem is
286 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)


Clearly, firm 1's profits depend on the amount of output chosen by firm 2,
and in order to make an informed decision firm 1 must forecast firm 2's
output decision. This is just the sort of consideration that goes into an
abstract game--each player must guess the choices of the other players.
For this reason it is natural to think of the Cournot model as being a one-
shot game: the profit of firm i is its payoff, and the strategy space of firm i
is simply the possible outputs that it can produce. A (pure strategy) Nash
equilibrium is then a set of outputs (y;, y,*)in which each firm is choosing
its profit-maximizing output level given its beliefs about the other firm's
choice, and each firm's beliefs about the other firm's choice are actually
correct.
   Assuming an interior optimum for each firm, this means that a Nash-
Cournot equilibrium must satisfy the two first-order conditions:




We also have the second-order conditions for each firm which take the form

            a2ni
            - - - 2p (Y)
            dy,Z
                         1
                             + pU(Y)yi- cy(yi) < 0 for i = 1,2
              +
where Y = yl yg.
  The first-order condition for firm 1 determines firm 1's optimal choice
of output as a function of its beliefs about firm 2's output choice; this
relationship is known as firm 1's reaction curve: it depicts how firm 1
will react given various beliefs it might have about firm 2's choice.
  Assuming sufficient regularity, the reaction curve of firm 1, fl(y2), is
defined implicitly by the identity




In order to determine how firm 1 optimally changes its output as its beliefs
about firm 2's output changes, we differentiate this identity and solve for




As usual, the denominator is negative due to the second-order conditions
so that the slope of the reaction curve is determined by the sign of the
mixed partial. This is easily seen to be
                                                    COURNOT EQUILIBRIUM      287




          Y;                           Yl
      Reaction curves. The intersection of the two reaction curves                  Figure
      is a Cournot-Nash equilibrium.                                                16.1

If the inverse demand curve is concave, or at least not "too" convex, this
expression will be negative, which indicates that a Cournot reaction curve
for firm 1 will generally have a negative slope. A typical example is depicted
in Figure 16.1.
   As we will see below, many important features of duopoly interaction
depend on the slope of the reaction curves, which in turn depends on the
mixed partial of profit with respect to the two choice variables. If the choice
variables are quantities, the "natural" sign of this mixed partial is negative.
In this case we say that yl and Ya are strategic substitutes. If the mixed
partial is positive, then we have a case of strategic complements. We'll
see an example of these distinctions below.


Stability of the system

Although we have been careful to emphasize the one-shot nature of the
Cournot game, Cournot himself thought of it in more dynamic terms. There
is, indeed, a natural (if somewhat suspect) dynamic interpretation to the
model. Suppose that we think of a learning process in which each firm
refines its beliefs about tHe other firm's behavior by observing its actual
choice of output.
   Given an arbitrary pattern of outputs at time 0, (yy,y$), firm 1 guesses
that firm 2 will continue to produce yz in period 1, and therefore choose the
profit-maximizing output consistent with this guess, namely y! = fi(yi).
Firm 2 observes this choice y; and conjectures that firm 1 will maintain
the output level y;. Firm 2 therefore chooses y: = f2(~:). In general the
output choice of firm i in period t is given by yf = fi(y;-').
   This gives us a difference equation in outputs that traces out a "cobweb"
like that illustrated in Figure 16.1. In the case illustrated, the firm 1's reac-
tion curve is steeper than firm 2's reaction curve and the cobweb converges
288 OLIGOPOLY (Ch 16)

to the Cournot-Nash equilibrium. We therefore say that the illustrated
equilibrium is stable. If firm 1's reaction curve were flatter than firm 2's,
then the equilibrium would be unstable.
   A somewhat different dynamic model arises if we imagine that the firms
adjust their outputs in the direction of increasing profits, assuming that
the other firm keeps its output fixed. This leads to a dynamical system
of the form




Here the parameters a1 > 0 and ag > 0 indicate the speed of adjustment.
  A sufficient condition for local stability of this dynamical system is




This is "almost" a necessary condition for stability; the problem comes
in the fact that the determinant may be zero even though the dynamical
system is locally stable. We will ignore the complications that arise from
consideration of these borderline cases.
   This determinant condition turns out t o be quite useful in deriving com-
parative statics results. However, it should be emphasized that the pos-
tulated adjustment process is rather ad hoc. Each firm expects the other
firm to keep its output constant, although it itself expects to change its
output. Inconsistent beliefs of this sort are anathema to game theory. The
problem is that the one-shot Cournot game cannot be given a dynamic
interpretation; in order to analyze the dynamics of a multiple period game,
one should really go to the repeated game analysis of the sort considered
in the previous chapter. Despite this objection, naive dynamic models of
this sort may have some claim to empirical relevance. It is likely that firms
will need to experiment in order to learn about how the market responds
to their decisions and the particular dynamic adjustment process described
above can be thought of as a simple model to decribe this learning process.


16.2 Comparative statics
Suppose that a is some parameter that shifts the profit function of firm 1.
The Cournot equilibrium is described by the conditions
                                                           SEVERAL FIRMS   289


Differentiating these equations with respect to a gives us the system




Applying Cramer's rule, in Chapter 26, page 477, we have




The sign of the denominator is determined by the stability condition in
(16.1); we assume that it is positive. The sign of the numerator is deter-
mined by
                                #sl a2n2
                               --  -
                                  dylda     ay$   '

The second term in this expression is negative by the second-order condition
for profit maximization. It follows that

                           .    &I
                          sign -= sign -
                                        .     @%I
                               da      dylda'
This condition says that in order to determine how a shift in profits af-
fects equilibrium output, we simply need to compute the mixed partial
d2ri/dyda.
  Let us apply this result to the duopoly model. Suppose that a is equal
to a (constant) marginal cost and profits are given by



Then a 2 s l / O y l d a = -1. This means that increasing the marginal cost for
firm 1 will reduce its Cournot equilibrium output.


16.3 Several firms

If there are n firms, the Cournot model has much the same flavor. In this
case the first-order condition for firm i becomes
290 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)


where Y =     xiyi. It is convenient to rearrange this equation t o take the
form



Letting si = y i / Y denote firm i's share of industry output, we can write




where E is the elasticity of market demand.
   This last equation illustrates the sense in which the Cournot model is,
in some sense, "in between" the case of monopoly and that of pure com-
petition. If si = 1, we have exactly the monopoly condition, and as si
approaches zero, so that each firm has an infinitesimal share of the market,
the Cournot equilibrium approaches a competitive equilibrium.
   There are a couple of special cases of (16.2) and (16.3) that are useful for
constructing examples. First, assume that each firm has constant marginal
costs of c,. Then adding up both sides of the equation across all n firms,
we have




Hence, aggregate industry output only depends on the sum of the marginal
costs, not on their distribution across firms2 If all firms have the same
constant marginal cost of c, then in a symmetric equilibrium s , = l l n , and
we can write this equation as




If, in addition, E is constant, this equation shows that price is a constant
markup on marginal cost. For this simple case it is clear that as n -, m,
price must approach marginal cost.


  Actually, one has t o be somewhat careful about such loose statements, as much de-
  pends on exactly how the share of each firm goes to zero. For a consistent specification,
  see Novshek (1980).

  Of course, we are assumzng an interior solution. If the marginal costs are too different,
  some firms will not want to produce in equilibrium.
                                                BERTRAND EQUILIBRIUM     291



Welfare

We have seen earlier that a monopolistic industry produces an inefficiently
low level of output since price exceeds marginal cost. The same is true of a
Cournot industry. A graphic way to illustrate the nature of the distortion
is to ask what it is that a Cournot industry maximizes.
   As we have seen earlier, the area under the demand curve, U(Y) =
~zp(x)   dx, is a reasonable measure of total benefits in certain circum-
stances. Using this definition, it can be shown that the output level at
a symmetric Cournot equilibrium with constant marginal costs maximizes
the following expression:



The proof is simply to differentiate this expression with respect to Y and
note that it satisfies equation (16.4). (We will assume that the relevant
second-order conditions are satisfied).
   In general we want an industry to maximize utility minus costs. A com-
petitive industry does in fact do this, while a monopoly simply maximizes
profits. A Cournot industry maximizes a weighted sum of these two objec-
tives, with the weights depending on the number of firms. As n increases,
more and more weight is given to the social objective of utility minus costs
as compared to the private objective of profits.


16.4 Bertrand equilibrium                                           ,

The Cournot model is an attractive one for many of the reasons outlined in
the last section, but it is by no means the only possible model of oligopoly
behavior. The Cournot model takes the firm's strategy space as being
quantities, but it seems equally natural to consider what happens if price
is chosen as the relevant strategic variable. This is known as the Bertrand
model of oligopoly.
   Suppose, then, that we have two firms with constant marginal costs of cl
and cz that face a market demand curve of D(p). For definiteness, assume
that cz > cl. As before, we assume a homogeneous product so that the
demand curve facing firm 1, say, is given by




That is, firm 1 believes that it can capture the entire market by setting a
price smaller than the price of firm 2. Of course, firm 2 is assumed to have
similar beliefs.
292 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)

   What is the Nash equilibrium of this game? Suppose that firm 1 sets pl
 higher than c2. This cannot be an equilibrium. Why? If firm 2 expected
firm 1 to make such a choice, it would choose p2 to be between pl and
 c2. This would yield zero profits to firm 1 and positive profits to firm 2.
Similarly, at any price below c2, firm 1 is "leaving money on the table."
 At any such price, firm 2 would choose to produce zero but firm 1 could
increase its profits by increasing its price slightly.
   Thus a Nash equilibrium in this game is for firm 1 to set pl = c2 and
to produce D(c2) units of output, while firm 2 sets pz 2 cz and produces
zero.
   It may seem somewhat nonintuitive that we get price equal to marginal
cost in a two-firm industry. Part of the problem is that the Bertrand game
is a one-shot game: players choose their prices and then the game ends.
This is typically not a standard practice in real-life markets.
   One way to think about the Bertrand model is that it is a model of
competitive bidding. Each firm submits a sealed bid stating the price
at which it will serve all customers; the bids are opened and the lowest
bidder gets the customers. Viewed in this way, the Bertrand result is not
so paradoxical. It is well-known that sealed bids are a very good way to
induce firms to compete vigorously, even if there are only a few firms.
   Up until now, we have assumed that fixed costs for each firm are zero. Let
us relax this assumption and consider what happens if each firm has fixed
costs of K > 0. We assume that each firm always has the shut-down option
of producing zero output and incurring zero costs. In this case, the logic
described above quickly yields the Bertrand equilibrium: the equilibrium
price is equal to the marginal cost of firm 2 (the higher cost firm), as long
as the profits to firm 1 are nonnegative. If the profits to firm 1 are negative,
then no equilibria in pure strategies exist.
   However, an equilibrium in mixed strategies will typically exist, and in
fact can often be explicitly calculated. In such an equilibrium, each firm
has a probability distribution over the prices that the other firm might
charge, and chooses its own probability distribution so as to maximize ex-
pected profits. This is a case where a mixed strategy may seem implausible;
however, as usual, that is in part an artifact of one-shot nature of analysis.
Even if we think of a repeated game, one could interpret a mixed strat-
egy as a policy of "sales": each store in a retail market could randomize
its price so that in any given week one store would have the lowest price
in town, and thereby capture all the customers. However, each week a
different store would be the winner.


EXAMPLE: A model of sales

Let us calculate the mixed strategy equilibrium in a duopoly sales model.
Suppose for simplicity that each firm has zero marginal costs and fixed costs
                                                      BERTRAND EQUILIBRIUM       293

of k . There are two types of consumers, informed consumers know the
lowest price being charged and uninformed consumers simply choose
a store at random. Suppose that there are I informed consumers and 2U
uninformed consumers. Hence, each store will get U uninformed consumers
each period for certain and will get the informed consumers only if they
happen to have the Iowest price. The reservation price of each consumer
is r .
   We will consider only the symmetric equilibrium, where each firm uses
the same mixed strategy. Let F ( p ) be the cumulative distribution function
of the equilibrium strategy; that is, F ( p ) is the probability that the chosen
price is less than or equal t o p. We let f ( p ) be the associated probability
density function which we will assume is a continuous density function,
since this allows us to neglect the probability of a tie.3
   Given this assumption, there are exactly two events that are relevant to
a firm when it sets a price p. Either it succeeds in having the lowest price,
an event that has probability 1 - F ( p ) , or it fails to have the lowest price, an
event that has probability F ( p ) . If it succeeds in having the lowest price,
it gets a revenue of p(U + I ) ; if it doesn't have the lowest price, it gets
revenue pU. In either case it pays a fixed cost of Ic. Thus, the expected
profits of the firm, %, can be written as




   Now note the following simple observation: every price that is actually
charged in the equilibrium mixed strategy must yield the same expected
profit. Otherwise, the firm could increase the frequency with which it
charged the more profitable price relative t o the less profitable prices and
increase its overall expected profit.
  This means that we must have



or, solving,
                                  P(I+u)-k-?i
                           F ( P )=
                                         PI
  It remains to determine T . The probability that a firm would charge a
price less than or equal to T is 1, so we must have F ( T )= 1. Solving this
equation gives us i f = rU - Ic, and substituting back into equation (16.5)
vields




  It can be shown by a more elaborate argument that there will be zero probability of
  a tie in equilibrium.
294 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)


Letting u = U / I , we can write this as




This expression equals zero at p = r u / ( l   + u), so F(p) = 0 for p 5 p, and
F(p) = 1 for any p 2 r .


16.5 Complements and substitutes

In our two models of oligopoly we have assumed that the goods produced
by the firms are perfect substitutes. However, it is straightforward to relax
that assumption, and by doing so we can point out a nice duality between
the Cournot and Bertrand equilibria. The point is most easily exhibited in
the case of linear demand functions, although it holds true in general. Let
the consumers' inverse demand functions be given by




Note that the "cross-price effects are symmetric" as is required for well-
behaved consumer demand functions.
  The corresponding direct demand functions are




where the parameters a l , a2, etc., are functions of the parameters a l , a2,
etc.
  When a1 = a 2 and P1 = ,B2 = 7, the goods are perfect substitutes.
When y = 0, the markets are independent. In general, y2/,B1f12 can be
used as an index of product differentiation. When it is 0, the markets are
independent, and when it is 1, the goods are perfect substitutes.
  Suppose, for simplicity, that marginal costs are zero. Then if firm 1 is a
Cournot competitor, it maximizes



and if it is a Bertrand competitor, it maximizes



Note that the expressions are very similar in structure: we simply inter-
change a1 with a l , ,B1 with bl, and y with -c. Hence, Cournot equilibrium
                                                    QUANTITY LEADERSHIP     295


with substitute products (where y > 0) has essentially the same mathemat-
ical structure as Bertrand equilibrium with complements (where c < 0).
   This "duality" allows us to prove two theorems for the price of one: when
we calculate a result involving Cournot competition, we can simply sub-
stitute the Greek for the Roman letters and have a result about Bertrand
competition.
   For example, we have seen earlier that the slopes of the reaction curves
are important in determining comparative statics results in the Cournot
model. In the case of heterogeneous goods discussed here, the reaction
curve for firm 1 is the solution to the following maximization problem:




This is easily seen to be


Translating the Greek to Roman, the reaction curve in the Bertrand model
is


   Note that the reaction curve in the Cournot model has an opposite slope
from the reaction curve in the Bertrand model. We have seen that reaction
curves are typically downward sloping in the Cournot model, which implies
that reaction curves will typically be upward sloping in the Bertrand model.
This is reasonably intuitive. If firm 2 increases its output, then firm 1 will
typically want to reduce output in order to force the price up. However, if
firm 2 increases its price, firm 1 will typically find it profitable to increase
its price in order to match the price increase.
   Another way to make this point is to use the concepts of strategic com-
plements and strategic substitutes introduced earlier. The outputs of the
firms are strategic substitutes since increasing y2 makes it less profitable
for firm 1 to increase its output. However, an increase in pg makes it more
profitable for firm 1 to increase its price. Since the signs of the mixed
partials are different, the reaction curves will have slopes of different signs.


16.6 Quantity leadership

Another model of duopoly of some interest is that of quantity leadership,
also known as the Stackelberg model. This is essentially a two-stage
model in which one firm gets to move first. The other firm can then observe
the first firm's output choice and choose its own optimal level of output.
In the terminology of the last chapter, the quantity leadership model is a
sequential game.
2% OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)




                React~oncurve for

                f~rm1




                \
                    Cournot equ~librium
                          Reaction curve for 2

                                    Stackelbera eauilibrium




                                                              OUTPUT 1




      Comparison of Cournot and Stackelberg equilibria. The                       Figure
     Nash equilibrium occurs where the two reaction curves intersect.             16.2
     The Stackelberg equilibrium occurs where one reaction curve is
     tangent to the isoprofit lines of the other firm.


  As usual, we solve this game "in reverse." Suppose that firm 1 is the
leader and firm 2 is the follower. Then firm 2's problem is straightforward:
given firm 1's output, firm 2 wants to maximize its profits p(yl y2)y2 - +
c2(y2). The first-order condition for this problem is simply



This is just like the Cournot condition described earlier, and we can use
this equation to derive the reaction function of firm 2, f2(yl) just as before.
   Moving back to the first stage of the game, firm 1 now wants to choose
its level of output, looking ahead and recognizing how firm 2 will respond.
Thus, firm 1 wants to maximize



This leads to a first-order condition of the form



Equations (16.6) and (16.7) suffice to determine the levels of output of the
two firms.
   The Stackelberg equilibrium is determined graphically in Figure 16.2.
Here the isoprofit lines for firm 1 indicate the combinations of output levels
that yield constant profits. Lower isoprofit lines are associated with higher
levels of profit. Firm 1 wants to operate at the point on firm 2's reaction
curve where firm 1 has the largest possible profits, as depicted.
                                                     QUANTITY LEADERSHIP     297


   How does the Stackelberg equilibrium compare to the Cournot equilib-
rium? One result is immediate from revealed preference: since the Stack-
elberg leader picks the optimal point on his competitor's reaction curve,
and the Cournot equilibrium is some "arbitrary" point on his competitor's
reaction curve, the profits to the leader in the Stackelberg equilibrium will
typically be higher than they would be in the Cournot equilibrium of the
same game.
   What about the profits of being a leader versus being a follower? Which
would a firm prefer to be? There is a nice, general result to be had, but it
requires some argument. We will analyze the general case of heterogeneous
goods, yl and y2, under the following assumptions. (Of course, these as-
sumptions include the special case of homogeneous goods, where yl and y2
are perfect substitutes.)

A l : Substitute products. x1(y1, y2) is a strictly decreasing function
of y2 and 7r2(y1, y2) is a strictly decreasing function of yl.

A2: Downward sloping reaction curves.               The reaction curves fi(yj)
are strictly decreasing functions.

Leadership preferred. Under assumptions A1 and A2, a firm always
weakly prefers to be a leader rather than a follower.

Proof. Let (y;, y,*) = (y;, f2(y;)) be the Stackelberg equilibrium when
firm 1 leads. First. we need to show



Suppose not, so that
                                 f l ( ~ 2 *>
                                            ) Y;
Applying the function f2(-) to both sides of this inequality, we find



Inequality (1) follows from A2 and equality (2) follows from the definition
of Stackelberg equilibrium.
   We now have the following chain of inequalities:



Inequality (1) follows from the definition of the reaction function and in-
equality (2) follows from equation (16.10) and assumption Al. According to
(16.11), the point (fl (Y,*),
                           f2(f1 (Y;))) yields higher profits than (y;, f2(y;)),
contradicting the claim that (y;, fi(y;)) is the Stackelberg equilibrium.
This contradiction establishes (16.8).
298 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)


  The result we are after now follows quickly from the inequalities
            max nz(fl(yz),yz) 21 .rrz(fi(~2*),~2*)
                                              2 2 ~FZ(Y;,Y~*).
              YZ


Inequality (1) follows from maximization, and inequality (2) follows (16.8)
and Al. The left and right terms in these inequalities show that firm 2's
profits are no smaller if it is the leader than if firm 1 is the leader. I

  Since downward sloping reaction functions and substitutes are usually
considered to be the "normal" case, this result indicates that we can typ-
ically expect that each Stackelberg firm would prefer to be the leader.
Which firm actually is the leader would presumably depend on historical
factors, e.g., which firm entered the market first, etc.


16.7 Price leadership

Price leadership occurs when one firm sets the price which the other
firm then takes as given. The price leadership model is solved just like the
Stackelberg model: first we derive the behavior of the follower, and then
derive the behavior of the leader.
   In a model with heterogeneous goods, let x,(p1,p2) be the demand for
the output of firm i. The follower chooses pz taking pl as given. That is,
the follower maximizes



We let p2 = gz(p1) be the reaction function that gives the optimal choice
of pz as a function of pl.
   The leader then solves



to determine his optimal value of pl.
   An interesting special case occurs when the firms are selling identical
products. In this case, if firm 2 sells a positive amount of output, it must
sell it at pz = pl. For each price p17 the follower will choose to produce
the amount of output S2(pl) that maximizes its profits, taking pl as given.
Hence, the reaction function in this case is simply the competitive supply
curve.
   If firm 1 charges price pl, firm 1 will sell r(pl) = X I(pl) - S2(pl) units
of output. The function r(pl) is known as the residual demand curve
facing firm 1. Firm 1 wants to choose pl so as to maximize
                                                        PRICE LEADERSHIP   299

This is just the problem of a monopolist facing the residual demand curve
~ ( ~ 1 1 .
  The solution is depicted graphically in Figure 16.3. We subtract the
supply curve of firm 2 from the market demand curve to get the residual
demand curve. Then we use the standard MR = MC condition to solve
for the leader's output.


      PRICE


                        MC, = MC, =




      Price leadership. Firm 1 subtracts firm 2's supply curve from               Figure
      the market demand curve to get the residual demand curve. It                16.3
      then chooses the most profitable production level on this curve.



   Returning to the heterogeneous product case, we can ask whether a firm
prefers to be a follower or a leader in this model. First we note that the
result proved above can be immediately extended to the price leadership
model just by replacing y,'s with p,'s. However, there are two difficulties
with this extension. First, it is not necessarily the case that profits will be
a decreasing function of the other firm's price. The derivative of profit of
firm 1 with respect to price 2 is




The sign of this derivative depends on whether price is greater or equal to
marginal cost. It turns out that this difficulty can be overcome; leadership
300 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)

is still preferred in a price-leader model, as long as the reaction functions
are downward sloping.
   However, the assumption of downward sloping price-reaction functions
is not a t all reasonable. For simplicity, suppose that marginal cost is zero.
Then the reaction function for firm 2 must satisfy the first-order condition




By the usual comparative statics calculation,

                         I                 a2x2
                  sign g2 (PI ) = sign


The first term may be positive or negative, but if the two goods are substi-
tutes the sign of the second term will be positive. Hence, as noted earlier,
we might well expect upward sloping reaction curves in the price-leadership
model.
   An argument similar to that given above can be used t o establish the
following proposition.

Consensus. If both firms have upward sloping reaction functions, then
if one prefers to be a leader, the other must prefer to be a follower.

Proof. See Dowrick (1986). 1

  From this the following observation is immediate.

Following preferred.         If both firms have identical cost and demand
functions and reaction curves are upward sloping, then each must prefer
to be the follower to being the leader.

Proof. If one prefers to lead, then by symmetry the other prefers to lead
as well. But this contradicts the proposition immediately above. I

   Here is another argument for this result in the special case where the
goods produced by the two firms are identical. The argument uses Figure
16.3. In this figure, firm 1 picks the price p' and the output level q; . Firm
2 has the option of choosing to supply the same output that firm 1 supplies,
q;, at the price pa, but rejects it in favor of producing a different level of
output-the output that lies on firm 2's supply curve. Hence firm 2 makes
higher profit than firm 1 in equilibrium.
  Intuitively, the reason that a firm prefers being a follower in a price
setting game is that the leader has to reduce its output to support the
price, whereas the follower can take the price as fixed by the leader and
produce as much as it wants; i.e., the follower can free-ride on the output
restriction of the leader.
                                  CLASSIFICATION AND CHOICE OF MODELS      301



16.8 Classification and choice of models

We have discussed four models of duopoly: Cournot, Bertrand, quantity
leadership, and price leadership. From a game theoretic viewpoint, these
models are distinguished by the definition of the strategy space (prices or
quantities) and by the information sets: whether one player knows the
other's choice when he makes his move.
   Which is the right model? In general, this question has no answer; it
can only be addressed in the context of a particular economic situation or
industry that one wants to examine. However, we can offer some useful
guidelines.
   It is important to remember that these models are all "one-shot games."
But in applications we are generally trying to model real-time interactions;
that is, an industry structure that persists for many periods. Thus it is
natural to demand that the strategic variables used to model the industry
be variables that cannot immediately be adjusted-nce chosen, they will
persist for some time period so that the one-shot analysis has some hope
of representing economic phenomena that take place in real time.
   Consider, for example, the Bertrand equilibrium. Formally speaking
this is a one-shot game: the duopolists simultaneously set prices without
observing the other's choice. But if it is costless to adjust your price as soon
as you see your rival's price (and before the customers see either price!),
then the Bertrand model is not very appealing: as soon as the rival firm
observes the other firm's price it can respond to it in some way or other,
likely leading to a non-Bertrand outcome.
   The Cournot model seems appropriate when quantities can only be ad-
justed slowly. This is especially appealing when "quantity" is interpreted
as "capacity." The idea is that each firm chooses, in secret, a production
capacity, realizing that once the capacity is chosen they will compete on
price--i.e., play a Bertrand game. Kreps & Scheinkman (1983) analyze
this two-stage game and show that the outcome is typically a Cournot
equilibrium. We will loosely outline a simplified version of their model
here.
   Assume that each firm simultaneously produces some output level yi in
the first period. In the second period each firm chooses a price at which
to sell its output. We are interested in the equilibrium of this t w ~ s t a g e
game.
   As usual, start with the second period. At this time firm i has a zero
marginal cost of selling any output less than y, and an infinite marginal cost
of selling any output more than y,. In equilibrium, each firm must charge
the same price; otherwise the high-price firm would benefit by charging a
price slightly lower than that of the low-price firm. Additionally, the price
                                     +
charged can be no greater than p(yl y2). For if it were, one firm could cut
its price slightly and capture the entire market. Finally, the price charged
 302 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)

                               +
 can be no less than p(yl y2) since raising the price benefits both firms
 when each is selling at capacity. (The outline of this argument is quite
 intuitive, but it is surprisingly difficult to establish rigorously.)
    The crucial observation is that when each firm is selling at capacity, then
 neither wants to cut its price. It is true that if it did cut its price it would
 steal all of its rival's customers, but since it is already selling all that it has
 to sell these extra customers are useless to it.4
    Once it is known that the equilibrium price in the second period is simply
 the inverse demand at capacity, it is simple to calculate the first period
 equilibrium: it is just the standard Cournot equilibrium. Hence, Cournot
 competition in capacities followed by Bertrand competition in prices lead
 to the standard Cournot outcome.


16.9 Conjectural variations

 The games of price leadership and quantity leadership described above
 can be generalized in an interesting way. Recall the first-order condition
 describing the optimal quantity choice of a Stackelberg leader:



The term f;(y,) indicates firm 1's belief about how firm 2's optimal be-
havior changes as yl changes.
  In the Stackelberg model, this belief is equal to the slope of the actual
reaction function for firm 2. However, we might think of this term as being
an arbitrary "conjecture" about how firm 2 responds to firm 1's choice of
output. Call this the conjectural variation of firm 1 about firm 2, and
denote it by 1/12. The appropriate first-order condition is now:



The nice thing about this parameterization is that different choices of the
parameters lead directly to the relevant first-order conditions for the various
models discussed earlier.

       = 0 - this is the Cournot model, in which each firm believes that
1) ~ 1 2
   the other firm's choice is independent from its own;

2) 1/12= -1 - this is the competitive model, since the first-order condition
   reduces to price equals marginal cost.

   However, this does bring up a delicate point: if one firm gets more customers than
   it can sell to, we must specify a rationing rule t o indicate what happens t o the extra
   customers. Davidson & Deneckere (1986) show that specification of the rationing rule
   can affect the nature of the equilibrium.
                                                             COLLUSION    303

3) ~2 = slope of firm 2's reaction curve - this is of course the Stackelberg
   model;

4 ) u12 = y2/y1 - in this case the first-order condition reduces to the con-
    dition for maximizing industry profits-the collusive equilibrium.

   This table shows that each of the major models discussed earlier is just
a special case of the conjectural variations model. In this sense, the idea of
a conjectural variation serves as a useful classification scheme for oligopoly
models.
   However, it is not really satisfactory as a model of behavior. The problem
is that it involves a kind of pseudo-dynamics pasted on top of inherently
static models. Each of the models examined earlier are specifically one-
shot models-in the Cournot model firms choose outputs independently, in
the Stackelberg model one firm chooses an output expecting the other to
react optimally, and so on. The conjectural variations model indicates that
one firm chooses an output because it expects the other firm t o respond
in some particular way: but how can the other firm respond in a one-shot
game? If one wants t o model a dynamic situation, where each firm is able
to respond to the other firm's output choice, then one should look a t the
repeated game to begin with.


16.1 0 Collusion

All of the models described up until now are examples of non-cooperative
games. Each firm is out to maximize its own profits, and each firm makes its
decisions independently of the other firms. What happens if we relax this
assumption and consider possibilities of coordinated actions? An industry
structure where the firms collude t o some degree in setting their prices and
outputs is called a cartel.
   A natural model is t o consider what happens if the two firms choose
their outputs in order to maximize joint profits. In this case the firms
simultaneously choose yl and y2 so as to maximize industry profits:




The first-order conditions are




Since the left-hand sides of these two equations are the same, the right-
hand sides must be the same-the firms must equate their marginal costs
of production t o each other.
304 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)

   The problem with the cartel solution is that it is not "stable." There
is always a temptation to cheat: to produce more than the agreed-upon
output. To see this, consider what happens if firm 1 contemplates increas-
ing its output by some small amount d y l , assuming that firm 2 will stick
with the cartel agreement level of 9;. The change in firm 1's profits as yl
changes, evaluated at the cartel solution, is




The equals sign in this expression comes from the first-order conditions
in equations (16.15)' and the inequality comes from the fact that demand
curves slope downward.
   If one firm believes that the other firm will stick to the agreed-upon
cartel output, it would benefit it to increase its own output in order to sell
more at the high price. But if it doesn't believe that the other firm will
stick with the cartel agreement, then it will not in general be optimal for it
to maintain the cartel agreement either! It might as well dump its output
on the market and take its profits while it can.
   The strategic situation is similar to the Prisoner's Dilemma: if you think
that other firm will produce its quota, it pays you to defect-to produce
more than your quota. And if you think that the other firm will not produce
at its quota, then it will in general be profitable for you to produce more
than your quota.
   In order to make the cartel outcome viable, some way must be found
to stabilize the market. This usually takes the form of finding an effective
punishment for firms that cheat on the cartel agreement. For example, one
firm might announce that if it discovered that the other firm changed its
output from the cartel amount it would in turn increase its own output.
It is interesting to ask how much would it have to increase its output in
response to a deviation by the other firm.
   We saw earlier that the conjectural variation that supports the cartel
solution is ~ 1 2= y1/y2. What does this mean? Suppose that firm 1
announces that if firm 2 increases its output by dy2 then firm 1 will respond
by increasing its output by dyl = ( y l / y 2 ) d y 2 . If firm 2 believes this threat,
then the change in profits that it expects from an output increase of dy2 is




Hence, if firm 2 believes that firm 1 will respond in this way, then firm 2
will not expect to profit from violating its quota.
  The nature of firm 1's punishment can be most easily seen by thinking
about the case of asymmetric market shares. Suppose that firm 1 produces
                                            REPEATED OLIGOPOLY GAMES     305

twice as much output as firm 2 in the cartel equilibrium. Then it has
to threaten to punish any deviations from the cartel output by producing
twice as much as its rival. On the other hand, firm 2 has to only threaten
to produce half as much as any deviations that its rival might consider.
  Although suggestive, this sort of analysis suffers from the standard prob-
lem with conjectural variations: it is compressing a dynamic interaction
into a static model. However, we shall see that a rigorous dynamic analysis
involves much the same considerations; the essential problem in support-
ing a cartel outcome is how to construct the appropriate punishment for
deviations.


16.1 1 Repeated oligopoly games
All of the games up until now have been "one-shot" games. But actual
market interactions take place in real time, and a consideration of the
repeated nature of the interaction is certainly appropriate. The simplest
way to proceed is to imagine the quantity-setting Cournot game as being
a repeated game.
   The treatment parallels the analysis of the repeated Prisoner's Dilemma
given in Chapter 15. The cooperative outcome, in this case, is the cartel
solution. The punishment can be chosen to be the Cournot output choice.
The strategies that support the cartel solution are then of the following
form: choose the cartel output unless your opponent cheats; if he cheats,
choose the Cournot output. Just as in the case of the Prisoner's Dilemma,
this will be a Nash equilibrium set of strategies, as long as the discount
rate is not too high.
   Unfortunately, the game has many, many other equilibrium strategies:
just as in the case of the repeated Prisoner's Dilemma, almost anything
can be a Nash equilibrium. Unlike the repeated Prisoner's Dilemma case,
this is also true for the finitely repeated quantity-setting game.
   To see this, let us examine a tweperiod game with identical firms having
zero marginal costs. Consider the following strategy for firm 1: produce
some output yl in the first period. If your opponent produces y2 first
period, produce the Cournot level of output, yf, next period. If your op-
ponent produces an amount other than yn, then produce an output large
enough to drive the market price to zero.
   What is firm 2's optimal response to this threat? If it produces y2 first
                                                            +
period and y; second period, it gets a payoff of 7r2 (yl, y2) 6n2(yf, y:). If
it produces an output different from y2 in the first period--say, an output
x-it gets a payoff of 7r2(yl,x). Thus, it will be profitable to cooperate
with firm 1 when



This condition will typically hold for a whole range of outputs (yl, y2).
306 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)

   The problem is that the threat to actually carry out the punishment
strategy is not credible: once the first period is over, it will in general not
be in firm 1's interest to flood the market. Said another way, flooding the
market is not an equilibrium strategy in the subgame consisting only of the
second period. Using the terminology of Chapter 15, this strategy is not
subgame perfect.
   It is not difficult to show that the unique subgame perfect equilibrium
in the finitely repeated quantity-setting game is the repeated one-shot
Cournot equilibrium, at least as long as the one-shot Cournot equilib-
rium is unique. The argument is the usual backwards induction: since
the Cournot equilibrium is the unique outcome in the last period, the play
in the first period cannot credibly influence the last period outcome, and
so the "myopic" Cournot equilibrium is the only choice.
   One is naturally led to ask whether the cartel output is sustainable
as a subgame perfect equilibrium in the infinite repeated game. Fried-
man (1971) showed that the answer is yes. The strategies that work are
similar to the punishment strategies discussed in the last chapter. Let A:
be the profits to firm i from the one-period Cournot equilibrium and let
?r:   be the profits from the one-period cartel outcome. Consider the fol-
lowing strategy for firm 1: produce the cartel level of output unless firm 2
produces something other than the cartel output, in which case revert to
producing the Cournot output forever.
    If firm 2 believes that firm 1 will produce its Cournot level of output in
a given period, then its optimal response is to produce the Cournot level of
output as well. (This is the definition of the Cournot equilibrium!) Hence,
repeating the Cournot output indefinitely is indeed an equilibrium of the
repeated game.
    To see whether firm 2 finds it profitable to produce the cartel level of
output, we must compare the present value of its profits from deviating
with its profits from cooperating. Letting ?r$ be the profits from deviating,
this condition becomes


That is, firm 2 gets the profits from deviating this period plus the present
value of the profits from the Cournot equilibrium every period in the future.
Rearranging, we have the condition
                                    $.   - A;               I
                                6>-
                                     A," - A; '

As long as 6 is sufficiently large--i.e., as long as the discount rate is suf-
ficiently small-this condition will be satisfied. As in the case of the re-
peated Prisoner's Dilemma, there are a multiplicity of other equilibria in
this model.
   The basic idea of (subgame perfect) punishment strategies can be ex-
tended in a variety of ways by allowing for different kinds of punishment
                                                       SEQUENTIAL GAMES     307

rather than simple Cournot reversion. For example, Abreu (1986) shows
that one period of punishment followed by a return to the cartel solution
will typically be sufficient to support the cartel output. This is reminis-
cent of the results about optimal punishment in the conjectural variations
model-as long as one firm can punish the other firm quickly enough,
it can ensure that the other firm will not profit from its deviation. See
Shapiro (1989) for a good survey of results concerning repeated oligopoly
games.


16.1 2 Sequential games

The repeated games described in the last section are simple repetitions of
one-shot market games. The choices that a firm makes in one period do
not affect its profits in another, except in the indirect way of influencing its
rival's behavior. However, in reality, decisions made a t one point in time
influence output produced at later dates. Investment decisions of this sort
play an important strategic role in some games.
   In examining models of this sort of behavior the distinction between Nash
equilibria and subgame-perfect equilibria is very important. To illustrate
this distinction in the simplest possible context, consider a simple model
of entry.
   Imagine an industry with two firms poised t o enter when conditions are
ripe. Assume that entry is costless and that there is some sort of exogenous
technological progress that reduces the costs of production over time. Let
.rrl(t) be the present value of the profit earned at time t if there is only one
firm in the market a t that time, and let 7r2(t) be the profit earned by each
of the firms if there are two firms in the market at time t. This reduced
form profit function glosses over the exact form of competition within the
industry; all we need is that .rrl(t) > 7rz(t) for all t, which simply means
that a monopoly is more profitable than a duopoly.
   We illustrate these profit flows in Figure 16.4. We suppose that initially
profits rise faster than the rate of interest, leading the discounted profits to
increase over time. But eventually technological progress in this industry
slows down causing profits to grow less rapidly than the rate of interest, so
that the present value of profits falls.
   The question of interest to us is the pattern of entry. The obvious can-
didate is the pair (tl, t s ); i.e., one of the two firms enters when a monopoly
becomes profitable, and the other firm enters when the duopoly becomes
profitable. This is the usual sort of positive profit entry condition, and in-
deed, it is easy to verify that it is a Nash equilibrium. However, somewhat
surprisingly, it is not subgame perfect.
   For consider what happens if firm 2 (the second entrant) decides to enter
slightly before time t l . It is true that it will lose money for a short time,
but now firm 1's threat to enter a t time t l is no longer credible. Given that
         308 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)

         PROFIT
         FLOW




                                   e  w
                                                                   Duopoly

                                                                       TIME




Figure            Profit flows and entry. In the subgame perfect equilibrium,
16.4              the first firm enters at to, the point where its discounted profits
                  are zero. Entry at tl is a Nash equilibrium, but not a subgame
                  perfect equilibrium.


         firm 2 is in the market, it is no longer profitable for firm 1 to enter at tl.
         Hence, firm 2 will receive positive monopoly profits over the range [tl,t 2 ] ,
         as well as receiving its duopoly profits after tz.
            Of course if firm 2 contemplates entering slightly before tl, firm 1 can
         contemplate this as well. The only subgame perfect equilibria in this model
         are for one of the firms to enter at time to, where the profits from the initial
         monopoly phase are driven to zero; i.e., the (negative) shaded area above
         .rrl(t) between to and tl equals the positive area beneath xl(t) between tl
         and tz. The threat of entry has effectively dissipated the monopoly profits!
            In retrospect, this makes a lot of sense. The firms are identically situ-
         ated and it would be somewhat surprising if they ended up with different
         profits. In the subgame perfect equilibrium, the profits from early entry
         are competed away, and all that are left are the profits from the duopoly
         stage of the game.


         16.1 3 Limit pricing

         It is often thought that the threat of entry serves as a disciplining force in
         oligopolies. Even if there are only a small number of firms currently in an
         industry, there may be many potential entrants, and hence the "effective"
         amount of competition could be quite high. Even a monopolist may face
         a threat of entry that induces it to price competitively. Pricing to prevent
         entry in this way is known as limit pricing.
            Although this view has great intuitive appeal, there are some serious
         problems with it. Let us examine some of these problems by laying out
         a formal model. Let there be two firms, an incumbent, who is currently
                                                               LIMIT PRICING    309


 producing in a market, and a potential entrant, who is contemplating
entry. The market demand function and the cost functions of both firms
are common knowledge. There are two periods: in the first period the
 monopolist sets a price and quantity, which can be observed by the potential
entrant, at which point it decides whether or not to enter the market. If
entry occurs, the firms play some duopoly game second period. If entry
does not occur, the incumbent charges the monopoly price second period.
   What is the nature of limit pricing in this model? Essentially nothing;
if entry occurs, the duopoly equilibrium is determined. The only concern
of the potential entrant is predicting the profits it can get in that duopoly
equilibrium. Since it knows the costs and demand function perfectly, the
first-period price conveys no information. Hence the incumbent may as
well get its monopoly profits while it can and charge the monopoly price
first period.
   One is tempted to think that the incumbent might want to charge a low
price first period in order to signal that it is "willing to fight" if entry occurs.
But this is an empty threat; if the other firm does enter, the incumbent
should rationally do the profit-maximizing thing at that point. Since the
potential entrant knows all of the relevant information, it can predict ex
ante what the profit-maximizing action of the incumbent will be, and plan
accordingly.
   Limit pricing has no role in this framework, since the first-period price
conveys no information about the second-period game. However, if we
admit some uncertainty into our model, we will find that limit pricing
emerges quite readily as an equilibrium strategy.
   Consider the following simple model. One unit of some good is demanded
if the market price is less than or equal to 3. There is one incumbent who
has constant marginal costs of 0 or 2, and there is one potential entrant
who has constant marginal costs of 1. In order to enter this market, the
entrant must pay an entry fee of 114. If the entrant enters the market, we
suppose that the firms engage in Bertrand competition.
   Since the firms have different costs, this means that one of the firms is
driven out of the market. If the incumbent is a low-cost firm, then it will
price (slightly below) the marginal cost of the entrant, 1, and thereby drive
the entrant out of the market. In this case, the incumbent makes a profit of
1 and the entrant loses the entry fee, -114. If the incumbent is a high-cost
firm, then the entrant prices the product slightly below 2, making a profit
of 2 - 1 - 114 = 314, and the incumbent is driven out of the market.
   If the incumbent is a high-cost firm and entry does not occur, it will set
the monopoly price of 3 and make a profit of 1. The question is, what price
should it set in the first period? Essentially, the low-cost incumbent would
like to set a price that is not viable for the high-cost incumbent, since this
would signal its type to the potential entrant. Suppose that the low-cost
incumbent sets a price slightly below 1 in the first period and the monopoly
price of 3 the second period. This is still profitable for it since it has zero
310 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)


costs. But this policy is not profitable for the high cost firm-in the first
period it would lose a bit more than 1 and in the second period it would
only make 1. Overall this policy induces a loss. Since only the low-cost firm
can afford to set a price of 1, it is a credible signal. This example shows
that limit pricing does play a role in a model with imperfect information:
it can serve as a signal to potential entrants about the cost structure of the
incumbent, thereby precluding entry, at least in some cases.

Notes

See Shapiro (1989) for a good survey of oligopoly theory. I follow his
treatment of repeated games closely. The material on comparative statics
in oligopoly was taken from Dixit (1986). The model of sales is from Var-
ian (1980). The discussion of capacity choice in the Cournot model is based
on Kreps & Scheinkman (1983). The analysis of profitability in leader-
follower games is due to Dowrick (1986). The duality between Cournot
and Bertrand equilibria was first noted Sonnenschein (1968) and extended
by Singh & Vives (1984). The simple model of limit pricing described here
was inspired by Milgrom & Roberts (1982).


Exercises

16.1. Suppose that we have two firms with constant marginal costs of cl and
two firms with constant marginal costs of cz, and that cz > cl. What is the
Bertrand equilibrium in this model? What is the competitive equilibrium
in this model?
16.2. Consider the model of sales described on page 294. As U / I increases,
what happens to F(p)? Interpret this result.
16.3. Given the linear inverse demand functions in the section on page 294
derive formulas for the parameters of the direct demand functions.
16.4. Using the linear demand functions in the previous problem, show that
quantities are always lower and prices higher in Cournot competition than
in Bertrand competition.
16.5. Show that if both firms have upward sloping reaction functions so that
fl(yJ) > 0, and (y;, yz) is the Stackelberg equilibrium, then fz(fi(&)) >
f2(~1*)= Y;.

16.6. The conjectural variation associated with the competitive model is
v = -1. This means that when one firm increases its output by one unit,
the other firm reduces its output by one unit. Intuitively, this hardly seems
like competitive behavior. What's wrong?
                                                                 Exercises   311


16.7. Show that if c{(x) < cL(x) for all x > 0, then the cartel solution
involves yl > y ~ .

16.8. Suppose that two identical firms are operating at the cartel solution
and that each firm believes that if it adjusts its output the other firm
will adjust its output so as to keep its market share equal to 1/2. What
does this imply about the conjectural variation? What kind of industry
structure does this imply?

16.9. Why are there many equilibria in the finitely repeated Cournot game
and only one in the finitely repeated Prisoner's Dilemma?

16.10. Consider an industry with 2 firms, each having marginal costs equal
to zero. The (inverse) demand curve facing this industry is



where Y = yl   + 1/2 is total output.
  (a) What is the competitive equilibrium level of industry output?

  (b) If each firm behaves as a Cournot competitor, what is firm 1's
optimal choice given firm 2's output?

  (c) Calculate the Cournot equilibrium amount of output for each firm.

  (d) Calculate the cartel amount of output for the industry.

  (e) If firm 1 behaves as a follower and firm 2 behaves as a leader, calculate
the Stackelberg equilibrium output of each firm.

16.11. Consider a Cournot industry in which the firms' outputs are denoted
by yl ,. . . , y,, aggregate output is denoted by Y = CZl yi, the industry
demand curve is denoted by P(Y), and the cost function of each firm is
given by q(yi) = cyi. For simplicity, assume that P1'(Y) < 0. Suppose
that each firm is required to pay a specific tax of ti.

  (a) Write down the first-order conditions for firm i.

  (b) Show that the industry output and price only depend on the sum of
the tax rates, Zy=l ti.

   (c) Consider a change in each firm's tax rate that does not change the
tax burden on the industry. Letting Ati denote the change in firm i's tax
rate, we require that xy=l Ati = 0. Assuming that no firm leaves the
industry, calculate the change in firm i's equilibrium output, Ayi. Hint:
no derivatives are necessary; this question can be answered by examination
of parts (a) and (b).
312 OLIGOPOLY (Ch. 16)


16.12. Consider an industry with the following structure. There are 50 firms
that behave in a competitive manner and have identical cost functions given
by c ( y ) = y 2 / 2 . There is one monopolist that has 0 marginal costs. The
demand curve for the product is given by




  (a) What is the supply curve of one of the competitive firms?

  (b) What is the total supply from the competitive sector?

  (c) If the monopolist sets a price p, how much output will it sell?

  (d) What is the monopolist's profit-maximizing output?

  (e) What is the monopolist's profit-maximizing price?

  (f) How much will the competitive sector provide at this price?

  (g) What will be the total amount of output sold in this industry?
                      CHAPTER             17

               EXCHANGE


In Chapter 13 we discussed the economic theory of a single market. We
saw that when there were many economic agents each might reasonably
be assumed to take market prices as outside of their control. Given these
exogenous prices, each agent could then determine his or her demands and
supplies for the good in question. The price adjusted to clear the market,
and at such an equilibrium price, no agent would desire to change his or
her actions.
   The single-market story described above is a p a r t i a l equilibrium model
in that all prices other than the price of the good being studied are assumed
t o remain fixed. In the general equilibrium model all prices are variable,
and equilibrium requires that all markets clear. Thus, general equilibrium
theory takes account of all of the interactions between markets, as well as
the functioning of the individual markets.
   In the interests of exposition, we will examine first the special case of
the general equilibrium model where all of the economic agents are con-
sumers. This situation, known as the case of p u r e exchange, contains
many of the phenomena present in the more extensive case involving firms
and production.
314 EXCHANGE (Ch. 17)

   In a pure exchange economy we have several consumers, each described
by their preferences and the goods that, they possess. The agents trade the
goods among themselves according to certain rules and attempt t o make
themselves better off.
  What will be the outcome of such a process? What are desirable out-
comes of such a process? What allocative mechanisms are appropriate for
achieving desirable outcomes? These questions involve a mixture of both
positive and normative issues. It is precisely the interplay between the
two types of questions that provides much of the interest in the theory of
resource allocation.


17.1 Agents and goods

The concept of good considered here is very broad. Goods can be dis-
tinguished by time, location, and state of world. Services, such as labor
services, are taken to be just another kind of good. There is assumed t o
be a market for each good, in which the price of that good is determined.
   In the pure exchange model the only kind of economic agent is the con-
sumer. Each consumer i is described completely by his preference, ki (or
his utility function, ui), and his initial endowment of the k commodities,
wi. Each consumer is assumed t o behave competitively-that is, to take
prices as given, independent of his or her actions. We assume that each
consumer attempts to choose the most preferred bundle that he or she can
afford.
   The basic concern of the theory of general equilibrium is how goods are
allocated among the economic agents. The amount of good j that agent i
holds will be denoted by        4.   Agent i's c o n s u m p t i o n b u n d l e will be
denoted by xi = (xi, . . . , xf); it is a k-vector describing how much of each
good agent i consumes. An allocation x = ( x l , . . . , x,) is a collection
of n consumption bundles describing what each of the n agents holds. A
feasible allocation is one that is physically possible; in the pure exchange
case, this is simply an allocation that uses up all the goods, i.e., one in
which   C;=,  xi =   xr=,  wi. (In some cases it is convenient to consider an
allocation feasible if xr=lXi I      xy=L=l~i.)
   When there are two goods and two agents, we can use a convenient way of
representing allocations, preferences, and endowments in a two-dimensional
form, known as the E d g e w o r t h box. We've depicted an example of an
Edgeworth box in Figure 17.1.
   Suppose that the total amount of good 1 is w1 = w: wi and that    +
                                               +
the total amount of good 2 is w 2 = wf wi. The Edgeworth box has a
width of w1and a height of w2. A point in the box, (xi, x:), indicates how
much agent 1 holds of the two goods. At the same time, it indicates the
amount that agent 2 holds of the two goods: (xi, xg) = ( w l - x i ,w 2 - x:).
Geometrically, we measure agent 1's bundle from the lower left-hand corner
                                                  WALRASIAN EQUILIBRIUM      315

          -                                                    CONSUMER 2




  CONSUMER 1                                                  -
                                                           GOOD 1

      E d g e w o r t h box. The length of the horizontal axis measures             Figure
      the total amount of good 1, and the height of the vertical axis               17.1
      measures the total amount of good 2. Each point in this box is
      a feasible allocation.

of the box. Agent 2's holdings are measured from the upper right-hand
corner of the box. In this way, every feasible allocation of the two goods
between the two agents can be represented by a point in this box.
   We can also illustrate the agents' indifference curves in the box. There
will be two sets of indifference curves, one set for each of the agents. All of
the information contained in a two-person, two-good pure exchange econ-
omy can in this way be represented in a convenient graphical form.


17.2 Walrasian equilibrium

We have argued that, when there are many agents, it is reasonable to
suppose that each agent takes the market prices as independent of his or her
actions. Consider the particular case of pure exchange being described here.
We imagine that there is some vector of market prices p = (pl, . . . , p k ) ,one
price for each good. Each consumer takes these prices as given and chooses
the most preferred bundle from his or her consumption set; that is, each
consumer i acts as if he or she were solving the following problem:

                                  max 'LL,(x,)
                                    x,

                             such that px, = pw,.

    The answer to this problem, x,(p, pw,), is the consumer's d e m a n d func-
t i o n , which we have studied in Chapter 9. In that chapter the consumer's
income or wealth, m, was exogenous. Here we take the consumer's wealth
316 EXCHANGE (Ch. 17)

to be the market value of his or her initial endowment, so that mi = pwi.
We saw in Chapter 9 that under an assumption of strict convexity of pref-
erences, the demand functions will be well-behaved continuous functions.
   Of course, for an arbitrary price vector p , it may not be possible actually
to make the desired transactions for the simple reason that the aggregate
demand,   xi  x i ( p ,pw,), may not be equal t o the aggregate supply, xi wi.
   It is natural t o think of an equilibrium price vector as being one that
clears all markets; that is, a set of prices for which demand equals supply
in every market. However, this is a bit too strong for our purposes. For
example, consider the case where some of the goods are undesirable. In
this case, they may well be in excess supply in equilibrium.
  For this reason, we typically define a Walrasian equilibrium t o be a
pair (p*,x*),such that




That is, p* is a Walrasian equilibrium if there is no good for which there is
positive excess demand. We show later, in Chapter 17, page 318, that if all
goods are desirable---in a sense to be made p r e c i s e t h e n in fact demand
will equal supply in all markets.



17.3 Graphical analysis

Walrasian equilibria can be examined geometrically by use of the Edge-
worth box. Given any price vector, we can determine the budget line of
each agent and use the indifference curves t o find the demanded bundles
of each agent. We then search for a price vector such that the demanded
points of the two agents are compatible.
   In Figure 17.2 we have drawn such an equilibrium allocation. Each agent
is maximizing his utility on his budget line and these demands are compat-
ible with the total supplies available. Note that the Walrasian equilibrium
occurs a t a point where the two indifference curves are tangent. This is
clear, since utility maximization requires that each agent's marginal rate
of substitution be equal to the common price ratio.
   Another way to describe equilibrium is through the use of offer curves.
Recall that a consumer's offer curve describes the locus of tangencies be-
tween the indifference curves and the budget line as the relative prices
vary-i.e., the set of demanded bundles. Thus, at an equilibrium in the
Edgeworth box the offer curves of the two agents intersect. At such an
intersection the demanded bundles of each agent are compatible with the
available supplies.
                                     EXISTENCE OF WALRASIAN EQUILIBRIA   317



             +                                      CONSUMER 2

GOOD 2   A




                  offer curve




     CONSUMER 1                                        *
                                                    GOOD 1



         Walrasian equilibrium in the Edgeworth box. Each agent                 Figure
         is maximizing utility on his budget line.                              17.2



17.4 Existence of Walrasian equilibria

Will there always exist a price vector where all markets clear? We will
analyze this question of the existence of Walrasian equilibria in this
section.
   Let us recall a few facts about this existence problem. First of all, the
budget set of a consumer remains unchanged if we multiply all prices by any
positive constant; thus, each consumer's demand function has the property
that xi (p, pwi) = xi (kp, kpwi) for all k > 0; i.e., the demand function is
homogeneous of degree zero in prices. As the sum of homogeneous functions
is homogeneous, the aggregate excess demand function,




is also homogeneous of degree zero in prices. Note that we ignore the fact
that z depends on the vector of initial endowments, (wi),since the initial
endowments remain constant in the course of our analysis.
   If all of the individual demand functions are continuous, then z will be a
continuous function, since the sum of continuous functions is a continuous
function. Furthermore, the aggregate excess demand function must satisfy
a condition known as Walras' law.

Walras' law. For any price vector p, we have pz(p) 3 0; i.e., the value
of the excess demand is identically zero.
318 EXCHANCE (Ch. 17)

Proof. We simply write the definition of aggregate excess demand and
multiply by p:




since x i ( p ,pi) must satisfy the budget constraint pxi = pwi for each
agent i = 1, ..., n. I


   Walras' law says something quite obvious: if each individual satisfies his
budget constraint, so that the value of his excess demand is zero, then the
value of the sum of the excess demands must be zero. It is important to re-
alize that Walras' law asserts that the value of excess demand is identically
zero--the value of excess demand is zero for all prices.
   Combining Walras' law and the definition of equilibrium, we have two
useful proposit ions.

Market clearing.   If demand equals supply i n k - 1 markets, and pk > 0,
then demand must equal supply in the k t h market.

Proof. If not, Walras' law would be violated. I

Free goods. If p* is a Walrasian equilibrium and z j ( p * ) < 0 , then
p; = 0. That is, if some good is in excess supply at a Walrasian equilibrium
it must be a free good.

Proof. Since p* is a Walrasian equilibrium, z ( p * ) 5 0 . Since prices are
                              k
nonnegative, p * z ( p * )= C,=lp:zi(p*) 5 0. If z, ( p * )< 0 and p; > 0, we
would have p * z ( p * )< 0, contradicting Walras' law. I


  This proposition shows us what conditions are required for all markets to
clear in equilibrium. Suppose that all goods are desirable in the following
sense:

Desirability.    If pi = 0 , then z , ( p ) > 0 for i = 1,. . . , k .



  The desirability assumption says that if some price is zero, the aggregate
excess demand for that good is strictly positive. Then we have the following
proposition:
                                            EXISTENCE OF AN EQUILIBRIUM    319




     Price simplices. The first panel depicts the one-dimensional                 Figure
     price simplex S1;the second panel depicts S2.                                17.3


Equality of demand and supply. If all goods are desirable and p* is
a Walrasian equilibrium, then z(p*)= 0.
Proof. Assume zi(p*) < 0. Then by the free goods proposition, pf = 0.
But then by the desirability assumption, zi(p*)> 0, a contradiction. I

   To summarize: in general all we require for equilibrium is that there is
no excess demand for any good. But the above propositions indicate that
if some good is actually in excess supply in equilibrium, then its price must
be zero. Thus, if each good is desirable in the sense that a zero price implies
it will be in excess demand, then equilibrium will in fact be characterized
by the equality of demand and supply in every market.


17.5 Existence of an equilibrium
Since the aggregate excess demand function is homogeneous of degree zero,
we can normalize prices and express demands in terms of relative prices.
There are several ways to do this, but a convenient normalization for our
purposes is to replace each absolute price pi by a normalized price



This has the consequence that the normalized prices pi must always sum
up to 1. Hence, we can restrict our attention to price vectors belonging to
the k - 1-dimensional unit simplex:
         320 EXCHANGE (Ch. 17)

         For a picture of S1 and S2 see Figure 17.3.
            We return now to the question of the existence of Walrasian equilibrium:
         is there a p* that clears all markets? Our proof of existence makes use of
         the Brouwer fixed-point theorem.

         Brouwer fixed-point theorem.          Iff : Skpl-+ Sk-l is a continuous
         function from the unit simplex to itself, there is some x in Sk-I such that
         x = f(x).
         Proof. The proof for the general case is beyond the scope of this book;
         a good proof is in Scarf (1973). However, we will prove the theorem for
         k = 2.
           In this case, we can identify the unit 1-dimensional simplex S1 with the
         unit interval. According to the setup of the theorem we have a continuous
         function f : [O,1] -+ [O, 11 and we want to establish that there is some x in
         [O, 11 such that x = f(x).
            Consider the function g defined by g(x) = f(x) -x. Geometrically, g just
         measures the difference between f(x) and the diagonal in the box depicted
         in Figure 17.4. A fixed point of the mapping f is an x* where g(x*)= 0.




Figure        Proof of Brouwer's theorem in two dimensions. In the
17.4          case depicted, there are three points where x = f(x).




            Now g(0) = f (0)- 0 > 0 since f (0) is in [O,l], and g(1) = f (1)- 1 < 0
         for the same reason. Since f is continuous, we can apply the intermediate
         value theorem and conclude that there is some x in [O,1]such that g(x) =
         f(x) - x = 0, which proves the theorem. I

           We are now in a position to prove the main existence theorem.
                                               EXISTENCE OF AN EQUILIBRIUM   321


Existence of Walrasian equilibria. If z : S k p l+ R~ is a continuous
function that satisfies Walrus' law, pz(p) = 0, then there exists some p*
i n Sk--'such that z(p*) 5 0.

Proof. Define a map g : Sk-I -+ Sk-' by

             gi(p) =
                        pi   + max(0, z i ( ~ ) )   for i = 1 , . . . , k.
                       1+   c;=1max(0, z,(P))
   Notice that this map is continuous since z and the max function are con-
tinuous functions. Furthermore, g ( p ) is a point in the simplex Sk-' since
xi   gi(p) = 1. This map also has a reasonable economic interpretation: if
                                                            >
there is excess demand in some market, so that zi(p) 0, then the relative
price of that good is increased.
   By Brouwer's fixed-point theorem there is a p* such that p* = g(p*);
i.e.,
                           +
               p; = P,' max(0, zi(p*))         for i = 1 , . . . , k. (17.1)
                       +
                     1 C , m a d o , zj (P*))
  We will show that p* is a Walrasian equilibrium. Cross-multiply equation
(17.1) and rearrange to get




Now multiply each of these k equations by zi(p*):


   i(p*)p:
   .
             [,xa                  ]
                  max(0, r j (p*)) = zi(p*)max(0, zi (p*)) i = 1,.. . , k.


Sum these k equations t o get




        k
Now         p f z i ( ~ *=
                         ) 0 by Walras' law so we have




   Each term of this sum is greater than or equal to zero since each term is
                          ) ~ .if any term were strictly greater than zero, the
either 0 or ( ~ ~ ( p * )But
322 EXCHANGE (Ch. 17)


equality wouldn't hold. Hence, every term must be equal to zero, which
says
                      zi(p*) 5 0 for i = 1,.. . ,k.
I

   It is worth emphasizing the very general nature of the above theorem.
All that is needed is that the excess demand function be continuous and
satisfy Walras7 law. Walras' law arises directly from the hypothesis that
the consumer has to meet some kind of budget constraint; such behavior
would seem to be necessary in any type of economic model. The hypothe-
sis of continuity is more restrictive but not unreasonably so. We have seen
earlier that if consumers all have strictly convex preferences then their de-
mand functions will be well defined and continuous. The aggregate demand
function will therefore be continuous. But even if the individual demand
functions display discontinuities it may still turn out the aggregate demand
function is continuous if there are a large number of consumers. Thus, con-
tinuity of aggregate demand seems like a relatively weak requirement.
   However, there is one slight problem with the above argument for exis-
tence. It is true that aggregate demand is likely to be continuous for positive
prices, but it is rather unreasonable to assume it is continuous even when
some price goes to zero. If, for example, preferences were monotonic and
the price of some good is zero, we would expect that the demand for such a
good might be infinite. Thus, the excess demand function might not even
be well defined on the boundary of the price simplex-i.e., on that set of
price vectors where some prices are zero. However, this sort of disconti-
nuity can be handled by using a slightly more complicated mathematical
argument.


EXAMPLE: The Cobb-Douglas Economy
Let agent 1 have utility function ul(x$,xi) = ( X : ) ~ ( X ? ) ~
                                                               and- ~endowment
w l = (1,O). Let agent 2 have utility function u2(x;, x;) = (x;)~(x;)'-~ and
endowment ~2 = (0,l). Then agent 1's demand function for good 1 is
                                                   am1
                           5 : ( ~ 1 , ~ 2 , m l=) -*
                                                      Pl
At prices (pl, p2), income is ml = pl x 1       + pz x 0 = pl. Substituting, we
have


Similarly, agent 2's demand function for good 1 is
                               THE FIRST THEOREM OF WELFARE ECONOMICS        323

  The equilibrium price is where total demand for each good equals total
supply. By Walras' law, we only need find the price where total demand
for good 1 equals total supply of good 1:




Note that, as usual, only relative prices are determined in equilibrium.


17.6 The first theorem of welfare economics

The existence of Walrasian equilibria is interesting as a positive result inso-
far as we believe the behavioral assumptions on which the model is based.
However, even if this does not seem to be an especially plausible assumption
in many circumstances, we may still be interested in Walrasian equilibria
for their normative content. Let us consider the following definitions.

Definitions of Pareto efficiency. A feasible allocation x is a weakly
Pareto efficient allocation if there is no feasible allocation x' such that all
agents strictly prefer x' to x. A feasible allocation x is a strongly Pareto
efficient allocation if there is no feasible allocation x' such that all agents
weakly prefer x' to x, and some agent strictly prefers x' to x.

   It is easy to see that an allocation that is strongly Pareto efficient is also
weakly Pareto efficient. In general, the reverse is not true. However, under
some additional weak assumptions about preferences the reverse implica-
tion is true, so the concepts can be used interchangeably.

Equivalence of weak and strong Pareto efficiency. Suppose that
preferences are continuous and monotonic. Then a n allocation is weakly
Pareto efficient if and only if it is strongly Pareto eficient.

Proof. If an allocation is strongly Pareto efficient, then it is certainly
weakly Pareto efficient: if you can't make one person better off without
hurting someone else, you certainly can't make everyone better off.
   We need to show that if an allocation is weakly Pareto efficient, then it
is strongly Pareto efficient. We prove the logically equivalent claim that if
an allocation is not strongly efficient, then it is not weakly efficient.
   Suppose, then, that it is possible to make some particular agent i better
off without hurting any other agents. We must demonstrate a way to make
everyone better off. To do this, simply scale back i's consumption bundle
324 EXCHANGE (Ch. 17)


by a small amount and redistribute the goods taken from i equally t o the
other agents. More precisely, replace i's consumption bundle xi by Oxi and
                                                            +
replace each other agent j's consumption bundle by x j (1 - O)xi/(n - 1).
By continuity of preferences, it is possible to choose 6 close enough to 1 so
that agent i is still better off. By monotonicity, all the other agents are
made strictly better off by receiving the redistributed bundle.

   It turns out that the concept of weak Pareto efficiency is slightly more
convenient mathematically, so we will ge~~erally  use this definition: when we
say "Pareto efficient" we generally mean "weakly Pareto efficient." How-
ever, we will henceforth always assume preferences are continuous and
monotonic so that either definition is applicable.
   Note that the concept of Pareto efficiency is quite weak as a normative
concept; an allocation where one agent gets everything there is in the econ-
omy and all other agents get nothing will be Pareto efficient, assuming the
agent who has everything is not satiated.
   Pareto efficient allocations can easily be depicted in the Edgeworth box
diagram introduced earlier. We only need note that, in the two-person
case, Pareto efficient allocations can be found by fixing one agent's utility
function at a given level and maximizing the other agent's utility func-
tion subject to this constraint. Formally, we only need solve the following
maximization problem:



                        such that u2(x2) 2 &
                                    Xl   + x2 = + w2.
                                               Wl


This problem can be solved by inspection in the Edgeworth box case. Sim-
ply find the point on one agent's indifference curve where the other agent
reaches the highest utility. By now it should be clear that the resulting
Pareto efficient point will be characterized by a tangency condition: the
marginal rates of substitution must be the same for each agent.
  For each fixed value of agent 2's utility, we can find an allocation where
agent 1's utility is maximized and thus the tangency condition will be
satisfied. The set of Pareto efficient points-the P a r e t o set-will thus be
the locus of tangencies drawn in the Edgeworth box depicted in Figure 17.5.
The P a r e t o set is also known as the c o n t r a c t curve, since it gives the
set of efficient "contracts" or allocations.
  The comparison of Figure 17.5 with Figure 17.2 reveals a striking fact:
there seems to be a one-to-one correspondence between the set of Wal-
rasian equilibria and the set of Pareto efficient allocations. Each Walrasian
equilibrium satisfies the first-order condition for utility maximization that
the marginal rate of substitution between the two goods for each agent be
equal t o the price ratio between the two goods. Since all agents face the
                                THE FIRST THEOREM OF WELFARE ECONOMICS        325



              C                                         CONSUMER 2




        CONSUMER 1          I                              +
                                                       GOOD 1




     Pareto efficiency in the Edgeworth box. The Pareto set,                        Figure
     or the contract curve, is the set of all Pareto efficient allocations.         17.5

same price ratio at a Walrasian equilibrium, all agents must have the same
marginal rates of substitution.
   Furthermore, if we pick an arbitrary Pareto efficient allocation, we know
that the marginal rates of substitution must be equal across the two agents,
and we can thus pick a price ratio equal to this common value. Graphically,
given a Pareto efficient point we simply draw the common tangency line
separating the two indifference curves. We then pick any point on this
tangent line to serve as an initial endowment. If the agents try to maximize
preferences on their budget sets, they will end up precisely a t the Pareto
efficient allocation.
   The next two theorems give this correspondence precisely. First, we
restate the definition of a Walrasian equilibrium in a more convenient form:

Definition of Walrasian equilibrium. A n allocation-price pair (x,p)
is a Walrasian equilibrium i f (1) the allocation is feasible, and (2) each
agent is making a n optimal choice from his budget set. I n equations:

         n             n
  (1)   Exz x u , .
        i=l
                  =
                      i=l
  (2) If x: is preferred by agent i to x,, then px: > p i .


   This definition is equivalent to the original definition of Walrasian equi-
librium, as long as the desirability assumption is satisfied. This definition
allows us to neglect the possibility of free goods, which are a bit of a nui-
sance for the arguments that follow.
326 EXCHANGE (Ch. 17)

First Theorem of Welfare Economics.               If ( x ,p) is a Walrasian equi-
librium, then x is Pareto eficient.

Proof. Suppose not, and let x' be a feasible allocation that all agents prefer
to x . Then by property 2 of the definition of Walrasian equilibrium, we
have
                       pxi > pwi for i = 1,.. . , n.

Summing over i = 1,. . . , n, and using the fact that x' is feasible, we have




which is a contradiction. I

   This theorem says that if the behavioral assumptions of our model are
satisfied then the market equilibrium is efficient. A market equilibrium is
not necessarily 'Loptimal"in any ethical sense, since the market equilibrium
may be very "unfair." The outcome depends entirely on the original dis-
tribution of endowments. What is needed is some further ethical criterion
to choose among the efficient allocations. Such a concept, the concept of a
welfare function, will be discussed later in this chapter.


17.7 The second welfare theorem

We have shown that every Walrasian equilibrium is Pareto efficient. Here
we show that every Pareto efficient allocation is a Walrasian equilibrium.

Second Theorem of Welfare Economics. Suppose x* is a Pareto
eficient allocation i n which each agent holds a positive amount of each
good. Suppose that preferences are convex, continuous, and monotonic.
Then x* is a Walrasian equilibrium for the initial endowments wi = xi* for
i = 1,...,n.

Proof. Let
                          Pi = { x i in R ~xi : + i xi).
This is the set of all consumption bundles that agent i prefers to xf . Then
define
                     n                    n
                                 z : z = x x i withxiinpi
                    i=l                  i=l

P is the set of all bundles of the k: goods that can be distributed among
the n agents so as to make each agent better off. Since each Piis a convex
                                              THE SECOND WELFARE THEOREM          327


set by hypothesis and the sum of convex sets is convex, it follows that P
is a convex set.
   Let w =   xy=l   xxf be the current aggregate bundle. Since x* is Pareto
efficient, there is no redistribution of x* that makes everyone better off.
This means that w is not an element of the set P.
   Hence, by the separating hyperplane theorem (Chapter 26, page 483)
there exists a p # 0 such that
                                    n
                          p z > p ~ xfor~ a l l z i n P.
                                   i=l

  Rearranging this equation gives us




We want to show that p is in fact an equilibrium price vector. The proof
proceeds in three steps.

  (1) p is nonnegative; that is, p 2 0.

   To see this, let ei = (0,. . . , I , . . . ,0) with a 1 in the ith component. Since
                                  +
preferences are monotonic, w ei must lie in P; since if we have one more
unit of any good, it is possible to redistribute it to make everyone better
off. Inequality (17.2) then implies
                      p(w +ei - W)2 0 for i = 1,.. . , k.
Canceling terms,
                        pei 2 0 for i = 1,. . . , k.
This equation implies pi 2 0 for i = 1,.. . , k.

  (2) If y, > j x,?, then pyj   > px,?, for each agent j = 1 , . . . , n.
  We already know that, if every agent i prefers yi to xf, then




Now suppose only that some particular agent j prefers some bundle y j
to xj. Construct an allocation z by taking some of each good away from
agent j and distributing it to the other agents. Formally, let 8 be a small
number, and define the allocations z by
328 EXCHANGE (Ch. 17)


  For small enough 8, strong monotonicity implies the allocation z is Pareto
preferred t o x', and thus Cy=,zi lies in P.Applying inequality (17.2), we
have
                                       n          n




   This argument demonstrates that if agent j prefers yj to xj+,then yj can
cost no less than x> It remains to show that we can make this inequality
strict.


  (3) If yj >j xj*,we must have pyj > pxj*.

   We already know that pyj 2 px;; we want to rule out the possibility
that the equality case holds. Accordingly, we will assume that pyJ = px;
and try to derive a contradiction.
   From the assumption of continuity of preferences, we can find some 8
with 0 < 0 < 1 such that 8yj is strictly preferred t o xj+ By the argument
of part (2), we know that 8yJ must cost a t least as much as xj':




One of the hypotheses of the theorem is that xj* has every component
strictly positive; from this it follows that pxj' > 0.
   Therefore, if pyJ - pxj = 0, it follows that 8pyJ < pxj'. But this
contradicts (17.3), and concludes the proof of the theorem. I


  It is worth considering the hypotheses of this proposition. Convexity and
continuity of preferences are crucial, of course, but strong monotonicity can
be relaxed considerably. One can also relax the assumption that xf >> 0.



A revealed preference argument

There is a very simple but somewhat indirect proof of the Second Welfare
Theorem that is based on a revealed preference argument and the existence
theorem described earlier in this chapter.
                                        PARETO EFFICIENCY AND CALCULUS     329


Second Theorem of Welfare Economics. Suppose that x* is a Pareto
eficient allocation and that preferences are nonsatiated. Suppose further
that a competitive equilibrium exists from the initial endowments oi = x;
and let it be given by (p', x'). Then, i n fact, (p', x*) is a competitive
equilibrium.

Proof. Since xf is in consumer i's budget set by construction, we must
have xl ki x f . Since x * is Pareto efficient, this implies that x; --i xl.
Thus if xi is optimal, so is xf.Hence, (p', x*) is a Walrasian equilibrium.
I

  This argument shows that if a competitive equilibrium exists from a
Pareto efficient allocation, then that Pareto efficient allocation is itself a
competitive equilibrium. The remarks following the existence theorem in
this chapter indicate that the only essential requirement for existence is
continuity of the aggregate demand function. Continuity follows from ei-
ther the convexity of individual preferences or the assumption of a "large"
economy. Thus, the Second Welfare Theorem holds under the same cir-
cumst ances.


17.8 Pareto efficiency and calculus

We have seen in the last section that every competitive equilibrium is
Pareto efficient and essentially every Pareto efficient allocation is a compet-
itive equilibrium for some distribution of endowments. In this section we
will investigate this relationship more closely through the use of differential
calculus. Essentially, we will derive first-order conditions that characterize
market equilibria and Pareto efficiency and then compare these two sets of
conditions.
   The conditions characterizing the market equilibrium are very simple.

Calculus characterization of equilibrium. If (x*,p*) is a market
equilibrium with each consumer holding a positive amount of every good,
then there exists a set of numbers ( X I , . . . , )A, such that:



Proof. If we have a market equilibrium, then each agent is maximized on
his budget set, and these are just the first-order conditions for such utility
maximization. The Xi's are the agents' marginal utilities of income. I

   The first-order conditions for Pareto efficiency are a bit harder to formu-
late. However, the following trick is very useful.
330 EXCHANGE (Ch. 17)

Calculus characterization of Pareto efficiency. A feasible allocation
x* is Pareto efficient if and only if x* solves the following n maximization
problems for i = 1,. . . , n:

                         max ui(xi)
                        (x: 9.;)
                                   n
                     such that     Ex:< w g   g = 1,..., k




Proof. Suppose x* solves all maximization problems but x* is not Pareto
efficient. This means that there is some allocation x' where everyone is
better off. But then x* couldn't solve any of the problems, a contradiction.
   Conversely, suppose x* is Pareto efficient, but it doesn't solve one of the
problems. Instead, let x' solve that particular problem. Then x' makes
one of the agents better off without hurting any of the other agents, which
contradicts the assumption that x* is Pareto efficient. 1

   Before examining the Lagrange formulation for one of these maximization
                                                      +
problems, let's do a little counting. There are k n - 1 constraints for
each of the n maximization problems. The first k constraints are resource
constraints, and the second n - 1 constraints are the utility constraints. In
each maximization problem there are kn choice variables: how much each
of the n agents has of each of the k goods.
   Let qg, for g = 1,. . . , k, be the Kuhn-Tucker multipliers for the resource
constraints, and let aj, for j # i, be the multipliers for the utility con-
straints. Write the Lagrangian for one of the maximization problems.




  Now differentiate L with respect to x: where g = 1,. . . , k and j =
1,. . . , n. We get first-order conditions of the form

                   au,(x; )
                   --              qg=o   g = 1, ..., k
                      ax:
                   auj(x;) - q g = O      j # i ; g = l ,... ,k.
                a~

  At first these conditions seem somewhat strange since they seem to be
asymmetric. For each choice of i , we get different values for the multipliers
(qg) and (a j ). However, the paradox is resolved when we note that the
                                          PARETO EFFICIENCY A N D CALCULUS    331


relative values of the qs are independent of the choice of i. This is clear
since the above conditions imply




             ax:

Since x* is given, q9/qh must be independent of which maximization prob-
lem we solve. The same reasoning shows that ai/aj is independent of which
maximization problem we solve. The solution to the asymmetry problem
now becomes clear: if we maximize agent i's utility and use the other
agent's utilities as constraints, then it is just as if we are arbitrarily setting
agent i's Kuhn-Tucker multiplier to be ai = 1.
  Using the First Welfare Theorem, we can derive nice interpretations of
the weights (ai) and (qg): if x* is a market equilibrium, then



However, all market equilibria are Pareto efficient and thus must satisfy



From this it is clear that we can choose p* = q and ai = l/Xi. In words,
the Kuhn-Tucker multipliers on the resource constraints are just the com-
petitive prices, and the Kuhn-Tucker multipliers on the agent's utilities are
just the reciprocals of their marginal utilities of income.
  If we eliminate the Kuhn-Tucker multipliers in the first-order conditions,
we get the following conditions characterizing efficient allocations:




This says that each Pareto efficient allocation must satisfy the condition
that the marginal rate of substitution between each pair of goods is the
same for every agent. This marginal rate of substitution is simply the ratio
of the competitive prices.
   The intuition behind this condition is fairly clear: if two agents had dif-
ferent marginal rates of substitution between some pair of goods, they could
arrange a small trade that would make them both better off, contradicting
the assumption of Pareto efficiency.
   It is often useful to note that the first-order conditions for a Pareto
efficient allocation are the same as the first-order conditions for maximizing
332 EXCHANGE (Ch. 17)

a weighted sum of utilities. To see this, consider the problem

                            max   c
                                  n


                                  i=l
                                        aiui (xi)


                     suchthat     czp<wg
                                  n


                                  i=l
                                                    g = l , ..., k.

The first-order conditions for a solution to this problem are


which are precisely the same as the necessary conditions for Pareto effi-
ciency.
   As the set of "welfare weights" (a l ,. . . , an) varies, we trace out the set of
Pareto efficient allocations. If we are interested in conditions that charac-
terize all Pareto efficient allocations, we need to manipulate the equations
so that the welfare weights disappear. Generally, this boils down to ex-
pressing the conditions in terms of marginal rates of substitution.
   Another way to see this is to think of incorporating the welfare weights
into the definition of the utility function. If the original utility function for
agent i is ui(xi), take a monotonic transformation so that the new utility
function is vi(xi) = aiui(xi). The resulting first-order conditions char-
acterize a partzcular Pareto efficient allocation-the one that maximizes
the sum of utilities for a particular representation of utility. But if we
manipulate the first-order conditions so that they are expressed in terms
of marginal rates of substitution, we will typically find a condition that
characterizes all efficient allocations.
   For now we note that this calculus characterization of Pareto efficiency
gives us a simple proof of the Second Welfare Theorem. Let us assume that
all consumers have concave utility functions, although this is not really
required. Then if x* is a Pareto efficient allocation, we know from the
first-order conditions that
                                    1
                       Dui(x*)= -q for i = 1,.. . , n.
                                    ai
   Thus, the gradient of each consumer's utility function is proportional
to some fked vector q. Let us choose q to be the vector of competitive
prices. We need to check that each consumer is maximized on his budget
set {xi : qx, 5 qxy). But this follows quickly from concavity; according
to the mathematical properties of concave functions:




Thus, if xi is in the consumer's budget set, u(x)          < u(xf).
                                                    WELFARE MAXIMIZATION     333



17.9 Welfare maximization

One problem with the concept of Pareto efficiency as a normative criterion
is that it is not very specific. Pareto efficiency is only concerned with
efficiency and has nothing to say about distribution of welfare. Even if we
agree that we should be at a Pareto efficient allocation, we still don't know
which one we should be at.
   One way to resolve these problems is to hypothesize the existence of
some social welfare function. This is supposed to be a function that
aggregates the individual utility functions to come up with a LLsocialutility."
The most reasonable interpretation of such a function is that it represents
a social decision maker's preferences about how to trade off the utilities of
different individuals. We will refrain from making philosophical comments
here and just postulate that some such function exists; that is, we will
suppose that we have
                                W : Rn + R,
so that W(ul,. . . , u,) gives us the "social utility" resulting from any distri-
bution (ul, . . . , un) of private utilities. To make sense of this construction
we have to pick a particular representation of each agent's utility which
will be held fixed during the course of the discussion.
  We will suppose that W is increasing in each of its arguments-if you
increase any agent's utility without decreasing anybody else's welfare, social
welfare should increase. We suppose that society should operate at a point
that maximizes social welfare; that is, we should choose an allocation x*
such that x* solves

                         max W(ui (xi),. . . , un(xn))
                                 n

                    such that   Ex:5
                                iil
                                         w
                                             g
                                                 g=l,..,k.


  How do the allocations that maximize this welfare function compare to
Pareto efficient allocations? The following is a trivial consequence of the
monotonicity hypothesis:

Welfare maximization and Pareto efficiency.                 If x* maximizes a
social welfare function, then x* is Pareto efficient.

Proof. If x* were not Pareto efficient, then there would be some feasi-
ble allocation x' such that ui(x:) > u , ( x ~ )for i = 1, . . . , n. But then
W ( ~ ~ ( x ~ ) ~ . . . + n>( x
                              W~( )~ i) ( x ; ) ,... ,un(x;)). 1

   Since welfare maxima are Pareto efficient, they must satisfy the same
first-order conditions as Pareto efficient allocations; furthermore, under
334 EXCHANGE (Ch. 17)


convexity assumptions, every Pareto efficient allocation is a competitive
equilibrium, so the same goes for welfare maxima: every welfare maximum
is a competitive equilibrium for some distribution of endowments.
   This last observation gives us one further interpretation of the com-
petitive prices: they are also the Kuhn-Tucker multipliers for the welfare
maximization problem. Applying the envelope theorem, we see that the
competitive prices measure the (marginal) social value of a good: how
much welfare would increase if we had a small additional amount of the
good. However, this is true only for the choice of welfare function that is
maximized at the allocation in question.
   We have seen above that every welfare maximum is Pareto efficient, but is
the converse necessarily true? We saw in the last section that every Pareto
efficient allocation satisfied the same first-order conditions as the problem
of maximizing a weighted sum of utilities, so it might seem plausible that
under convexity and concavity assumptions things might work out nicely.
Indeed they do.

Pareto efficiency and welfare maximization. Let x* be a Pareto
eficient allocation with xf >> 0 for i = 1,. . . , n. Let the utility functions
ui be concave, continuous, and monotonic functions. Then there is some
choice of weights a f such that x* mw5mizes C a f u i ( x i ) subject to the re-
source constraints. firthemore, the weights are such that af = 1/Xf where
X f is the ith agent's marginal utility of income; that is, i f mi is the value
of agent i's endowment at the equilibrium prices p*, then

                               A* = dvi (P*mi)
                                        dmi
Proof. Since x* is Pareto efficient, it is a Walrasian equilibrium. There
therefore exist prices p such that each agent is maximized on his or her
budget set; this in turn implies

                     D u i ( x z ) = Xip*   for i = 1,.. . , n.

  Consider now the welfare maximization problem

                               max    C a i q (xi)
                        such that     x     xf 5     xf *
                                                                     Notes   335


   According t o the sufficiency theorem for concave constrained maximiza-
tion problems (Chapter 27, page 504), x* solves this problem if there exist
nonnegative numbers (ql, . . . , qk) = q such that



If we choose ai = l / X i , then the prices p serve as the appropriate nonneg-
ative numbers and the proof is done. I

   The interpretation of the weights as reciprocals of the marginal utilities
of income makes good economic sense. If some agent has a large income at
some Pareto efficient allocation, then his marginal utility of income will be
small and his weight in the implicit social welfare function will be large.
   The above two propositions complete the set of relationships between
market equilibria, Pareto efficient allocations, and welfare maxima. To
recapitulate briefly:

  (1) competitive equilibria are always Pareto efficient;

  (2) Pareto efficient allocations are competitive equilibria under convexity
  assumptions and endowment redistribution;

  (3) welfare maxima are always Pareto efficient;

  (4) Pareto efficient allocations are welfare maxima under concavity as-
  sumptions for some choice of welfare weights.

  Inspecting the above relationships we can see the basic moral: a com-
petitive market system will give efficient allocations but this says nothing
about distribution. The choice of distribution of income is the same as the
choice of a reallocation of endowments, and this in turn is equivalent to
choosing a particular welfare function.


Notes

The general equilibrium model was first formulated by Walras (1954).
The first proof of existence was due to Wald (1951); more general treat-
ments of existence were provided by McKenzie (1954) and Arrow & De-
breu (1954). The definitive modern treatments are Debreu (1959) and Ar-
row & Hahn (1971). The latter work contains numerous historical notes.
   The basic welfare results have a long history. The proof of the first welfare
theorem used here follows Koopmans (1957). The importance of convexity
in the Second Theorem was recognized by Arrow (1951) and Debreu (1953).
The differentiable treatment of efficiency was first developed rigorously by
         336 EXCHANGE (Ch. 17)

         Samuelson (1947). The relationship between welfare maxima and Pareto
         efficiency follows Negisihi (1960).
            The revealed preference proof of the Second Welfare Theorem is due to
         Maskin & Roberts (1980).


         Exercises

         17.1. Consider the revealed preference argument for the Second Welfare
         Theorem. Show that if preferences are strictly convex, then x', = x: for all
         i = 1, ..., n.

         17.2. Draw an Edgeworth box example with an infinite number of prices
         that are Walrasian equilibria.

         17.3. Consider Figure 17.6. Here x* is a.Pareto efficient allocation, but
         x* cannot be supported by competitive prices. Which assumption of the
         Second Welfare Theorem is violated?




          CONSUMER 1                                    GOOD 1


Figure        Arrow's exceptional case. The allocation x* is Pareto effi-
17.6          cient but there are no prices at which x* is a Walrasian equilib-
              rium.



         17.4. There are two consumers A and B with the following utility functions
         and endowments:
                              2
                       uA(x;,xA) =alnx;+(l-a)lnxA 2          UA = ( 0 , l )
                           1     2
                       uB(xB,xB) = min(xh, xg)     UB = (1,O).

         Calculate the market clearing prices and the equilibrium allocation.
                                                                    Exercises   337

17.5. We have n agents with identical strictly concave utility functions.
There is some initial bundle of goods w. Show that equal division is a
Pareto efficient allocation.

17.6. We have two agents with indirect utility functions:




and initial endowments



Calculate the market clearing prices.

17.7. Suppose that all consumers have quasilinear utility functions, so that
                 +
vi (p, mi) = vi (p) mi. Let p* be a Walrasian equilibrium. Show that the
aggregate demand curve for each good must be downward sloping at p*.
More generally, show that the gross substitutes matrix must be negative
semidefinite.

17.8. Suppose we have two consumers A and B with identical utility func-
tions U A ( X ~ , =
                  X~)
                    uB(xl, x2) = max(xl, 22). There are 1 unit of good 1
and 2 units of good 2. Draw an Edgeworth box that illustrates the strongly
Pareto efficient and the (weakly) Pareto efficient sets.

17.9. Consider an economy with 15 consumers and 2 goods. Consumer
                                                                +
3 has a CobbDouglas utility function us(x!j,xi) = Inxi Inxi. At a
certain Pareto efficient allocation x*, consumer 3 holds (10,5). What are
the competitive prices that support the allocation x*?

17.10. If we allow for the possibility of satiation, the consumer's budget
constraint takes the form pxi 5 pwi. Walras' law then becomes pz(p) 5 0
for all p 2 0. Show that the proof of existence of a Walrasian equilibrium
given in the text still applies for this generalized form of Walras' law.

                                                            +
17.11. Person A has a utility function of UA (XI,52) = XI 2 2 and person
B has a utility function u ~ ( x ~ ,=x ~ )
                                       max(xl,x2). Agent A and agent B
have identical endowments of (1/2,1/2).

  (a) Illustrate this situation in an Edgeworth box diagram.

  (b) What is the equilibrium relationship between pl and p2?

  (c) What is the equilibrium allocation?
                       CHAPTER             18
         PRODUCTION


The previous chapter dealt only with a pure exchange economy. In this
chapter we will describe how one extends such a general equilibrium model
to an economy with production. First we will discuss how to model firm
behavior, then how to model consumer behavior, and finally how the basic
existence and efficiency theorems need to be modified.


18.1 Firm behavior

We will use the representation for technologies described in Chapter 1. If
there are k goods, then a net output vector for firm j is a k-vector yj, and
the set of feasible net output vectors-the production possibilities set-for
firm j is Y,. Recall that a net output vector has negative entries for net
inputs and positive entries indicating net outputs. Examples of production
possibilities sets are described in Chapter 1.
   We will deal exclusively with competitive, price-taking firms in this chap-
ter. If p is a vector of prices of the various goods, pyj is the profit associated
with the production plan yj. Firm j is assumed to choose a production
plan yj* that maximizes profits.
                                                          FIRM BEHAVIOR   339


   In Chapter 2 we dealt with the consequences of this model of behavior.
There we described the idea of the net supply function yj(p) of a compet-
itive firm. This is simply the function that associates to each vector p the
profit-maximizingnet output vector at those prices. Under certain assump
tions the net supply function of an individual firm will be well-defined and
nicely behaved. If we have m firms, the aggregate net supply function
will be y(p) = C;, yj(p). If the individual net supply functions are well-
defined and continuous functions then the aggregate net supply function is
well-defined and continuous.
   We can also consider the aggregate production possibilities set,
Y. This set indicates all feasible net output vectors for the economy as
a whole. This aggregate production possibilities set is the sum of the
individual production possibility sets so that we can write




It is a good idea to remind yourself of what this notation means. A pro-
duction plan y is in Y if and only if y can be written as




where each production plan yj is in 5 . Hence, Y represents all production
plans that can be achieved by some distribution of production among the
firms j = 1, ...,m.
Aggregate profit maximization. A n aggregate production plan, y,
maximizes aggregate profit, i f and only i f each f i n ' s production plan yj
maximizes its indiwidual profit.

Proof. Suppose that y = CYT1      yj maximizes aggregate profit but some
firm k could have higher profits by choosing y6. Then aggregate profits
could be higher by choosing the same plan yi for firm k and doing exactly
what was done before for the other firms.
   Conversely, let (yj) for j = 1,.. . , m be a set of profit-maximizing pro-
duction plans for the individual firms. Suppose that y = Cj"==,     yj is not
profit-maximizing at prices p. This means that there is some other pro-
duction plan y' = CY=ly$ with y$ in 5 that has higher profits:




But by inspecting the sums on each side of this inequality, we see that some
individual firm must have higher profits at y$ than at yj. I
340 PRODUCTION (Ch. 18)


   The proposition says that if each firm maximizes profits, then aggregate
profits must be maximized, and, conversely, that if aggregate profits are
maximized, then each firm's profits must be maximized. The argument
follows from the assumption that aggregate production possibilities are
simply the sum of the individual firms' production possibilities.
   It follows from this proposition that there are two ways to construct
the aggregate net supply function: either add up the individual firms' net
supply functions, or add up the individual firms' production sets and then
determine the net supply function that maximizes profits on this aggregate
production set. Either way leads to the same function.


18.2 Difficulties

It is convenient to assume that the aggregate net supply function is well-
 behaved, but a more detailed analysis would derive this from underlying
properties of the production sets. If production sets are strictly convex
and suitably bounded, it is not hard to show that the net supply functions
will be well-behaved. Conversely, if the production sets have nonconvex
regions this will lead to discontinuities in the net supply "functions." The
quotes are to emphasize the fact that in the presence of nonconvexities
demand functions will not be well-defined; at some prices there may be
several profit-maximizing bundles. If the discontinuities are "small" this
may not matter much, but it is hard to make general statements.
   The in-between case is the constant-returns-to-scale case. We've already
seen in Chapter 2 that the net supply behavior in this case may be rather
unpleasant: zero, infinity, or a whole range of outputs may be supplied,
depending on the prices. Despite this apparently bad behavior, the net
supply "functions" associated with constant-returns-to-scale technologies
turn out to depend more-or-less continuously on prices.
   The first point to make is that net supply "functions" will not be func-
tions at all. The definition of a function requires that there be a unique
point in the range associated with each point in the domain. If the produc-
tion set exhibits constant returns to scale, then if some net output vector y
                                                          >
yields maximal profits of zero, then so does t y for any t 0. Hence there
is an infinity of bundles that are optimal net supplies.
   Mathematically, this is handled by defining a type of generalized function
called a correspondence. A correspondence associates with each point in
its domain a set of points in its range. If the set of points is convex, then
we say that we have a convex correspondence. Of course a function is
a special case of a convex correspondence.
   It is not hard to show that if the production set is convex, then the net
supply correspondence is a convex correspondence. Furthermore, it turns
out that the net supply correspondence changes in an appropriately contin-
uous way as prices change. Almost all the results for net supply functions
                                                   CONSUMER BEHAVIOR    341


that we use in this chapter can be extended to the case of correspondences.
Interested readers may consult the references at the end of the chapter
for details. However, we will limit our analysis to the case of net supply
functions in order to keep the discussion as simple as possible.


18.3 Consumer behavior

Production introduces two new complications into our model of consumer
behavior: labor supply and profit distribution.


Labor supply

In the pure exchange model the consumer was assumed to own some ini-
tial endowment w, of commodities. If the consumer sells this vector of
commodities, he receives an income of pw,. It is immaterial whether the
consumer sells his entire bundle and buys some goods back, or whether he
sells only part of his bundle. The observed amount of income may differ,
but the economic income is the same.
    If we introduce labor into the model, we introduce a new possibility:
consumers can supply different amounts of labor depending on the wage
rates.
    We examined a simple model of labor supply in Chapter 9, page 145.
In that model the consumer has        of "time" available which he has to
divide between labor, e, and leisure, L = - e. The consumer cares about
leisure, L, and a consumption good, c. The price of labor-the wage rate-
is denoted by w and the price of the consumption good is denoted by p.
The consumer may already own an endowment of the consumption good
-
c , which contributes to his nonlabor income.
    We can write the consumer's maximization problem as

                           max u(c, L)
                      such that pc = pi?   + w (C - L).
It is often more convenient t o write the budget constraint as



The second way of writing the budget constraint treats leisure as just an-
other good: one has an endowment of it,    z,
                                          and one "sells" the endowment
to a firm at a price w, then "buys back" some of the leisure at the same
price w.
  The same strategy can be used in the more complex case where the
consumer has many different types of labor. For any vector of prices of
342 PRODUCTION (Ch. 18)

goods and labor, the consumer can consider selling off his or her endowment
and then buying back the desired bundle of goods and leisure. When we
view the labor supply problem in this way, we see that it fits exactly into
the previous model of consumer behavior. Given an endowment vector w
and a price vector p , the consumer solves the problem
                                 max u(x)
                            such that p x = po.
The only complication is that there are now more constraints on the prob-
lem; for example, the total amount of leisure consumed has to be less than
24 hours a day. Formally, such constraints can be incorporated into the
definition of the consumption set described in Chapter 7, page 94.


Distribution of profits

We now turn to the question of profit distribution. In a capitalist economy,
consumers own firms and are entitled to a share of the profits. We will
summarize this ownership relation by a set of numbers (Tij), where Tij
represents consumer i's share of the profits of firm j . For any firm j we
require that C:=7'i,   = 1, so that it is completely owned by individual
consumers. We will take the ownership relations as being historically given,
although more complicated models can incorporate the existence of a stock
market for shares.
   At a price vector p each firm j will choose a production plan that
will yield a profit of pyj(p). The total profit income received by con-
sumer i is just the sum of the profits he receives from each of the firms:
CGl Tijpy3(p). The budget constraint of the consumer now becomes


   We assume that the consumer will choose a utility-maximizing bundle
that satisfies this budget constraint. Hence, consumer 2's demand function
can be written as a function of the price vector p. Again it is necessary to
make an assumption of strict convexity of preferences to ensure xi(p) is a
(single-valued) function. However, we have seen in Chapter 9 that under
such an assumption xi(p) will be continuous, at least at strictly positive
prices and income.


18.4 Aggregate demand
Adding together all of the consumers' demand functions gives the aggregate
consumer demand function X ( p ) = Cy=lxi (p). The aggregate supply
                                                  AGGREGATE DEMAND     343


vector comes from adding together the aggregate supply from consumers,
which we denote by w = CT=t=l  w i , and the aggregate net supply of firms,
Y(p). Finally, we define the aggregate excess demand function by




   Notice that the sign convention for supplied commodities works out
nicely: a component of z(p) is negative if the relevant commodity is in
net excess supply and positive if the commodity is in net excess demand.
  An important part of the existence argument in a pure exchange economy
was the application of Walras' law. Here is how Walras' law works in an
economy with production.

Walras' law. If z(p) is as defined above, then pz(p) = 0 for all p.

Proof. We expand z(p) according to its definition.




The budget constraint of the consumer is pxi = pWi     + xElTijpyj(p).
Making this replacement




since ELl Tij = 1 for each j. I


  Walras' law holds for the same reason that it holds in the pure exchange
case: each consumer satisfies his budget constraint, so the economy as a
whole has to satisfy an aggregate budget constraint.
344 PRODUCTION (Ch. 18)



18.5 Existence of an equilibrium
If z ( p ) is a continuous function defined on the price simplex that satisfies
Walras' law, the argument of Chapter 17 can be applied to show that there
exists a p* such that z ( p * ) 5 0. We have seen that continuity follows if
the production possibilities set for each firm is strictly convex. It is not too
hard to see that we only need to have the aggregate production possibilities
set convex. Even if the individual firms have technologies that exhibit slight
nonconvexities, such as a small region of increasing returns to scale, the
induced discontinuities may be smoothed out in the aggregate.
   Recall that the argument for existence we have sketched here is valid only
when we are dealing with demand functions. The only serious restriction
that this imposes is that it rules out constant-returns-to-scale technologies,
which we have argued is a rather important case. Therefore, we will state
an existence theorem for the general case and discuss the economic meaning
of the assumptions.

E x i s t e n c e of an equilibrium. A n equilibrium exists for an economy i f
the following assumptions are satisfied:

(1) Each consumer's consumption set is closed, convex, and bounded below;

(2) There is no satiation consumption bundle for any consumer;

(3) For each consumer i = 1,. . . , n, the sets { x i : xi kix i ) and ( x i : xi ki
xi) are closed;

(4) Each consumer holds an initial endowment vector in the interior of his
consumption set;

(5) For each consumer i, if xi and x: are two consumption bundles, then
xi +-i xi implies txi   +
                     ( 1 - t)x: +-i xi for any 0 < t < 1;

(6) For each firm j , 0 is an element of Y,;

(7) Y = CT=m=l
           Y , is closed and convex;




Proof. See Debreu (1959). 1

   Although the proof of this theorem is beyond the scope of this book,
we can at least make sure we understand the purpose of each assump-
tion. Assumptions ( 1 ) and (3) are needed to establish the existence of a
                                      WELFARE PROPERTIES O F EQUILIBRIUM    345


utility-maximizing bundle. Assumptions (1)-(5) are needed to establish
the continuity of the consumer's demand correspondence.
   Assumption (6) is an assumpt. sn that a firm can always go out of busi-
ness: this ensures that equilibrium profits will be nonnegative. Assumption
(7) is needed to guarantee continuity of each firm's (multivalued) net sup-
ply function. Assumption (8) ensures that production is irreversible in the
sense that you can't produce a net output vector y and then turn around
and use the outputs as inputs and produce all the inputs as outputs. It is
used to guarantee the feasible set of allocations will be bounded. Finally,
assumption (9) says that any production plan that uses all goods as inputs
is feasible; this is essentially an assumption of free disposal; it implies that
the equilibrium prices will be nonnegative.


18.6 Welfare properties of equilibrium
An allocation (x,y) is feasible if aggregate holdings are compatible with
the aggregate supply:




As before, a feasible allocation (x, y) is Pareto efficient if there is no other
feasible allocation (x', y') such that x: +i xi for all i = 1,. . . , n.
First Theorem of Welfare Economics.                If (x, y, p) is a Walrasian
equilibrium, then (x, y) is Pareto eficient.

Proof. Suppose not, and let (x', y') be a Pareto dominating allocation.
Then since consumers are maximizing utility we must have
                              m

               px: > pwi   + x T i j p y j for all i = 1,.. . ,n.
                              j=1
Summing over the consumers i = 1,. . . , n, we have




Here we have used the fact that C2=l Tij = 1. Now we use the definition
                                                       +
of feasibility of x' and replace C;=l xi by Cjm=lyg CiZ1
                                                     n
                                                        wi:
346 PRODUCTION (Ch. 18)


  But this says that aggregate profits for the production plans (y;) are
greater than aggregate profits for the production plans (yj) which contra-
dicts profit maximization by firms. I

  The other basic welfare theorem is just about as easy. We will content
ourselves with a sketch of the proof.

Second Theorem of Welfare Economics.              Suppose (x*,y*) is a
Pareto eficient allocation i n which each consumer holds strictly positzve
amounts of each good, and that preferences are convex, continuous, and
strongly monotonic. Suppose firms' production possibility sets, Y j , for
j = 1,.. . ,m are convex. Then there exists a price vector p 2 0 such
that:

(1) if x: +i x f , then pxa > pxf   for i = 1,.. . , n;

(2) 2f y; is i n 5 , then py; 2 pyi for j = 1,. . . ,m.
Proof. (Sketch) As before, let P be the set of all aggregate preferred
bundles. Let F be the set of all feasible aggregate bundles; that is,




Then F and P are both convex sets, and, since (x*,y*) is Pareto efficient,
F and P are disjoint. We can therefore apply the separating hyperplane
theorem in Chapter 26, page 483, and find a price vector p such that

                   pz t 2 pz tt for all zt in P and z" in F.

Monotonicity of preferences implies that p 2 0. We can use the construc-
tion given in the pure exchange proof to show that at these prices each
consumer is maximizing preferences and each firm is maximizing profits. a

   The above proposition shows that every Pareto efficient allocation can
be achieved by a suitable reallocation of "wealth." We determine the allo-
cation (x*,y*) that we want, then determine the relevant prices p. If we
give consumer i income px;, he or she will not want to change his or her
consumption bundle.
   We can interpret this result in several ways: first, we can think of the
state as confiscating the consumers' original endowments of goods and
leisure and redistributing the endowments in some way compatible with
the desired income redistribution. Notice that this redistribution may in-
volve a redistribution of goods, profit shares, and leisure.
                                     WELFARE PROPERTIES O F EQUILIBRIUM   347


   On the other hand, we can think of consumers as keeping their original
endowments but being subject to a lump sum tax. This tax is unlike
usual taxes in that it is levied on "potential" income rather than "realized"
income; that is, the tax is levied on endowments of labor rather than on
labor sold. The consumer has to pay the tax regardless of his actions. In
a pure economic sense, taxing an agent by a lump sum tax and giving the
proceeds to another agent is the same as giving some of the first agent's
labor to the other agent and letting him sell it at the going wage rate.
   Of course, agents may differ in ability, or--equivalently-in their en-
dowments of various kinds of potential labor. In practice it may be very
difficult to observe such differences in ability so as to know how to levy the
appropriate lump sum taxes. There are substantial problems involved in
efficient redistribution of income when abilities vary across individuals.


A revealed preference argument

Here is a simple but somewhat indirect proof of the Second Welfare The-
orem based on a revealed preference argument that generalizes the similar
theorem given in Chapter 17.

Second Theorem of Welfare Economics. Suppose that (x*,y*) is
a Pareto eficient allocation and that preferences are locally nonsatiated.
Suppose further that a competitive equilibrium exists from the initial en-
dowments wi = x; with profit shares Tij   = 0 for dl i and j , and let it be
given by (p',xl, y'). Then in fact, (pl,x*,y*) is a competitive equilibrium.

Proof. Since xt satisfies each consumer's budget constraint by construc-
tion, we must have xi kixf. Since x* is Pareto efficient, this implies that
x!, y x2f. Thus, if xi provides maximum utility on the budget set, so does
x; .
   Due to the nonsatiation assumption, each agent will satisfy his budget
constraint with equality so that



Summing over the agents i = 1,. . . , n and using feasibility, we have




                           P'CY;
                              = p ' C y;.
348 PRODUCTION (Ch. 18)

  Hence, if y' maximizes aggregate profits, then y* maximizes aggregate
profits. By the usual argument, each individual firm must be maximizing
profits. I

   This proposition states that if an equilibrium exists from the Pareto ef-
ficient allocation (x*,y*),then (x*,y * ) is itself a competitive equilibrium.
We may well ask what is required for an equilibrium to exist. According to
the earlier discussion concerning existence, two assumptions are sufficient:
(1) that all demand functions be continuous; and (2) that Walras' law be
satisfied. The continuity of demand will follow from the convexity of pref-
erences and production sets. Walras' law can be checked by the following
calculation:
                      P ~ P=) P ~ ( P - ) w - PY(P)
                            = PX(P) - PX* - P ~ ( P )
                            = 0 - p Y ( p ) 5 0.
   We see in this model that the value of excess demand is always nonpos-
itive. This occurs because we did not give the consumers a share of the
firms' profits. Since these profits are being "thrown away," the value of


                                                                  -
excess demand may well be negative. However, an inspection of the proof
of the existence of equilibrium in Chapter 17, page 321, shows that we
didn't really need to use the assumption that pz(p)
have pz(p) _< 0.
                                                           0; it is enough to

   This result shows that the crucial conditions for the second welfare the-
orem are simply the conditions that a competitive equilibrium exists-i.e.,
the convexity conditions.


18.7 Welfare analysis in a productive economy
It should come as no surprise that the analysis of welfare maximization
in a productive economy proceeds in much the same way as in the pure
exchange case. The only real issue is how t o describe the feasible set of
allocations in the case of production.
   The easiest way is to use the transformation function mentioned in Chap-
ter 1, page 4. Recall that this is a function that picks out efficient produc-
tion plans in the sense that y is an efficient production plan if and only
if T(y) = 0. It turns out that nearly any reasonable technology can be
described by means of a transformation function.'
   The welfare maximization problem can then be written as
                             max W ( ~ i ( x i .) ., . , ~ n ( ~ n ) )
                       such that T(x',     . . . , x k ) = 0.

  We can incorporate the resource endowments into the definition of the transformation
  function.
                                                   GRAPHICAL TREATMENT      349


where Xg = Cy=lx: for g = 1, . . . , k. The Lagrangian for this problem is



and the first-order conditions are




These conditions can be rearranged to yield




The conditions characterizing welfare maxirnization require that the mar-
ginal rate of substitution between each pair of commodities must be equal
to the marginal rate of transformation between those commodities.


18.8 Graphical treatment

There is an analog of the Edgeworth box that is very helpful in understand-
ing production and general equilibrium. Suppose that we consider a one-
consumer economy. The consumer leads a rather schizophrenic life: on the
one hand he is a profit-maximizing producer who produces a consumption
good from labor inputs while on the other hand he is a utility-maximizing
consumer who owns the profit-maximizing firm. This is sometimes called
a Robinson Crusoe economy.
   In Figure 18.1 we have drawn the production set of the firm. Note that
labor is measured as a negative number since it is an input to the production
process and that the technology exhibits constant returns to scale.
   There is some maximum amount of labor that can be supplied, E. For
simplicity, we assume that the initial endowment of the consumption good
is zero. The consumer has preferences over consumption-leisure bundles
which are given by the indifference curves in the diagram. What will the
equilibrium wage be?
   If the real wage is given by the slope of the production set, the consumer's
budget set will coincide with the production set. He will demand the
bundle that gives him maximal utility. The producer is willing to supply
         350 PRODUCTION (Ch. 18)

          CONSUMPTION
                        I




                                         Labor

Figure         Robinson Crusoe economy with constant returns. Labor
18.1           is measured as a negative number and the technology exhibits
               constant returns t o scale.

         the bundle since he gets zero profits. Hence, both the consumption and
         the labor markets clear.
            Notice the following interesting point: the real wage is determined en-
         tirely by the technology while the final production and consumption bundle
         is determined by consumer demand. This observation can be generalized
         to the Nonsubstitution Theorem which states that, if there is only one
         nonproduced input to production and the technology exhibits constant re-
         turns t o scale, then the equilibrium prices are independent of tastes-they
         are determined entirely by technology. We will prove this theorem in Chap-
         ter 18, page 354.
            The decreasing returns t o scale case is depicted in Figure 18.2. We can
         find the equilibrium allocation by looking for the points where the marginal
         rate of substitution equals the marginal rate of transformation. The slope
         at this point gives us the equilibrium real wage.
            Of course, at this real wage the budget line of the consumer does not
         pass through the endowment point (0, E ) . The reason is that the consumer
         is receiving some profits from the firm. The amount of profits the firm
         is making, measured in units of the consumption good, is given by the
         vertical intercept. Since the consumer owns the firm, he receives all of
         these profits as "nonlabor" income. Thus, his budget set is as indicated,
         and both markets do indeed clear.
            This brings up an interesting point about profits in a general equilibrium
         model. In the treatment above, we have assumed that the technology
         exhibits decreasing returns to labor without any particular explanation
         of why this might be so. A possible reason for such decreasing returns to
                                                          GRAPHICAL TREATMENT   351


 CONSUMPTION

               I
               I
                I
                   I
                    ,
                    I




                                          Endowment
                                          including profits
                                      /




                                  -
                                  L
                         )C---
               Leisure    Labor
      Robinson Crusoe economy with decreasing returns. The                            Figure
      budget line of the consumer does not pass through (0, since    r)               18.2
      he receives some of the profits from the firm.

labor might be the presence of some fixed factor-land, for example. In this
interpretation Robinson's production function for consumption depends on
the (fixed) land input, T, and the labor input, L. The production function
may well exhibit constant returns to scale if we increase both factors of
production, but, if we fix the land input and look at output as a function
of labor alone, we would presumably see decreasing returns to labor. We
have seen in Chapter 1, page 16, that every decreasing-returns-to-scale
technology can be thought of as a constant-returns-to-scale technology by
postulating a fixed factor.
   From this point of view the " p r o f i t s " ~ rnonlabor incorn-an be in-
terpreted as rent to the k e d factor. If we do use this interpretation, then
profits broadly speaking are zero----the value of the output must be equal
to the value of the factors, almost by definition. Whatever is left over is
automatically counted as a factor payment, or rent, to the fixed factor.



EXAMPLE: The Cobb-Douglas constant returns economy

Suppose we have one consumer with a CobbDouglas utility function for
                                                              +
consumption, x, and leisure, R: u(x, R) = a ln x (1 - a ) ln R. The con-
sumer is endowed with one unit of labor/leisure and there is one firm with
a constant-returns-to-scale technology: x = aL.
  By inspection we see that the equilibrium real wage must be the marginal
product of labor; hence, w*/p* = a. The maximization problem of the
352 PRODUCTION (Ch. 18)


consumer is
                                        +
                            max a l n x (1 - a) In R
                                    +
                       such that px w R = w.
In writing the budget constraint, we have used the fact that equilibrium
profits are zero. Using the by now familiar result that the demand functions
for a Cobb-Douglas utility function have the form x(p) = amlp where m
is money income, we find




Hence, equilibrium supply of labor is a, and the equilibrium output is a 2 .


EXAMPLE: A decreasing-returns-to-scale economy

Suppose the consumer has a Cobb-Douglas utility function as in the last
example, but the producer has a production function x =        a.We ar-
bitrarily normalize the price of output to be 1. The profit maximization
problem is
                             max L ~- /wL.  ~
This problem has first-order condition:



Solving for the firm demand and supply functions,




The profit function is found by substitution:




The income of the consumer now includes profit income so that the demand
for leisure is



By Walras' law we only need find a real wage that clears the labor market:
                                                  GRAPHICAL TREATMENT    353


Solving this equation, we find



The equilibrium level of profits is therefore



  Here is an alternative way to solve the same problem. As indicated
earlier, the decreasing-returns-to-scale feature of the technology is presum-
ably due to the presence of a fixed factor. Let us call this factor "land"
and measure it in units so that the total amount of land is T = 1. Let the
production function be given by L ~ T + .Note that this function exhibits
constant returns to scale and coincides with the original technology when
T = 1. The price of land will be denoted by q.
  The profit maximization problem of the firm is


which has first-order conditions




In equilibrium the land market will clear so that T = 1. Inserting this into
the above equations gives
                               L = (2w)-2
                                  L = (2q)2.
These equations together imply q = 1 / 4 w .
   The consumer's income now consists of his income from his endowment
                                                                 -
of labor, WE= w, plus his income from his endowment of land, qT = q.
His demand for leisure is therefore given by



  Setting demand for labor equal to supply of labor yields the equilibrium
real wage



The equilibrium rent to land is



Note that this is the same as the earlier solution.
354 PRODUCTION (Ch. 18)



18.9 The Nonsubstitution Theorem

Here we will present an argument for the Nonsubstitution Theorem men-
tioned earlier. We will assume that there are n industries producing out-
puts yi, i = 1,. . . , n. Each industry produces only a single output; no joint
production is allowed. There is only one nonproduced input to production
denoted by yo. We generally think of this nonproduced good as labor. The
                +
prices of the n 1 goods will be denoted by w = (wo,wl, . . . , w,).
   As usual, the equilibrium prices will only be determined as relative prices.
We will assume that labor is a necessary input to each industry. Thus in
equilibrium wo > 0, and we can choose it as numeraire; that is, we can
arbitrarily set wo = 1.
   We will assume that the technology exhibits constant returns to scale.
We have seen in Chapter 5, page 66, that this implies that each industry's
cost function can be written as ci(w, yi) = ci(w)yi for i = 1,. . . , n. The
functions q ( w ) are the unit cost functions-how much it costs to pro-
duce one unit of output at the prices w, measured in terms of the numeraire
price wo.
   We also assume that labor is indispensable to production so that the
unit factor demand for labor is strictly positive. Using 24 to denote firm
i's demand for factor 0 when y = 1, we can use the derivative property of
the cost function to write




Note that this implies that the cost functions are strictly increasing in
zoo. Since the cost functions strictly increase in at least one of the prices,
~ ( t w=) tq(w) > c~(w)for t > 1.

Nonsubstitution Theorem.. Suppose there is only one nonproduced
input to production, this input is indispensable to production, there is n o
joint production, and the technology exhibits constant returns to scale. Let
(x, y, w ) be a Walrasian equilibrium with yi > 0 for i = 1,. . . , n. Then w
is the unique solution to wi = q(w), i = 1,.. . , n.

Proof. If w is an equilibrium price vector in a constant-returns-to-scale
economy, then profits must be zero in each industry; that is:



Since yi > 0 for i = 1,. . . , n this condition can be written as
                                             THE NONSUBSTITUTION THEOREM     355


This says that any equilibrium price vector must satisfy the condition that
price equals average cost. Since wo > 0 and labor is an indispensable factor
of production, we must have ci(w)> 0. This in turn implies that wi > 0
for i = 0,. . . , n. In other words, all equilibrium price vectors are strictly
positive.
   We will show that there is only one such equilibrium price vector. For
suppose w' and w were two distinct solutions to the above system of equa-
tions. Define
                              t = wk
                                  - =max w!     2.
                                 W,          i   Wi
Here the maximum ratio of the components of the two vectors occurs at
component m at which w:, is t times as large as w,.
  Suppose that t > 1. Then we have the following string of inequalities:

          w,:   =I   tw, =2 t % ( ~=3) c,(tw) >4 %(w') =5 wk.

  The justifications for these equalities and inequalities are as follows:

  (1) definition of t;

  (2) assumption that w is a solution;

  (3) linear homogeneity of cost function;

  (4) definition of t, assumption t > 1, and strict monotonicity of cost
  function in the vector of factor prices;

  (5) assumption that w' is a solution.

  The result of assuming t > 1 is a contradiction, so t < 1, and thus
w 2 w'. The role of w and w' is symmetric in the above argument so
we also have w' 2 w . Putting these two inequalities together, we have
W'= W , as required. I

   This theorem says that, if there is an equilibrium price vector for the
economy, it must be the solution to wi = ci(w)for i = 1,.. . , n. The
surprising thing is that w does not depend on demand conditions at all;
i.e., w is completely independent of preferences and endowments.
   Let us use the term technique to refer to the factor demands necessary
to produce one unit of output. Let w* be the vector of prices that satisfies
the zer~profitconditions. Then we can determine the equilibrium tech-
nique for firm i by differentiating the cost function with respect to each of
the factor prices j :
                                        dci( w * )
                             2;(w*)=   3 -


                                             dwj
356 PRODUCTION (Ch. 18)


   Since the equilibrium prices are independent of demand conditions, the
equilibrium choice of technique will be independent of demand conditions.
No matter how consumer demands change the firm will not substitute away
from the equilibrium technique; this is the reason for the name nonsubsti-
tution theorem.



18.1 0 Industry structure in general equilibrium

Recall that the number of firms is a given in the Walrasian model. In Chap-
ter 13 we argued that the number of firms in an industry was a variable.
How can we reconcile these two models?
   Let us consider first the constant-returns case. Then we know that the
only profit-maximizing level of profits compatible with equilibrium is that
of zero profits. Furthermore, at the prices compatible with zero profits,
the firms are willing to operate at any level. Hence, the industry structure
of the economy is indeterminate--firms are indifferent as to what market
share they hold. If the number of firms is a variable, it is also indeterminate.
   Consider now the decreasing-returns case. If all technology is decreasing
returns, we know that there will be some equilibrium profits. In the general
equilibrium model as we have described it up until now, there is no reason
to have constant profits across firms. The usual argument for constant
profits is that firms will enter the industry with the highest profits; but if
the number of firms is fixed this cannot occur.
   What would in fact happen if the number of firms were variable? Presum-
ably we would see entry occur. If the technology really exhibits decreasing
returns to scale, the optimum size of the firm is infinitesimal, simply be-
cause it is always better to have two small firms than one large one. Hence,
we would expect continual entry to occur, pushing down the profit level.
In long-run equilibrium we would expect to see an infinite number of firms,
each operating at an infinitesimal level.
   This seems rather implausible. One way out is to return to the argument
we mentioned in Chapter 13: if we can always replicate, the only sensible
long-run technology is a constant-returns-tescale technology. Hence, the
decreasing-returns-tescale technology really must be due to the presence
of some fixed factor. In this interpretation the equilibrium "profits" should
really be regarded as returns to the fixed factor.


Notes

See Samuelson (1951) for the nonsubstitution theorem. The treatment hers
follows von Weizsacker (1971).
                                                                  Exercises   357



Exercises

18.1. Consider an economy in which there are two nonproduced factors of
production, land and labor, and two produced goods, apples and bandan-
nas. Apples and bandannas are produced with constant returns to scale.
Bandannas are produced using labor only, while apples are produced using
labor and land. There are N identical people, each of whom has an initial
endowment of fifteen units of labor and ten units of land. They all have
utility functions of the form U ( A ,B ) = c l n A + (1- c) In B where 0 < c < 1
and where A and B are a person's consumption of apples and bandannas,
respectively. Apples are produced with a fixed-coefficients technology that
uses one unit of labor and one unit of land for each unit of apples produced.
Bandannas are produced using labor only. One unit of labor is required for
each bandanna produced. Let labor be the numeraire for this economy.

  (a) Find competitive equilibrium prices and quantities for this economy.

   (b) For what values (if any) of the parameter c is it true that small
changes in the endowment of land will not change competitive equilibrium
prices?

  (c) For what values (if any) of the parameter c is it true that small
changes in the endowment of land will not change competitive equilibrium
consumptions?

18.2. Consider an economy with two firms and two consumers. Firm 1 is
entirely owned by consumer 1. It produces guns from oil via the production
function g = 2x. Firm 2 is entirely owned by consumer 2; it produces butter
from oil via the production function b = 32. Each consumer owns 10 units
of oil. Consumer 1's utility function is ~ ( gb), = g.4b.6 and consumer 2's
                                +        +
utility function is u(g, b) = 10 .5 lng .5 In b.

  (a) Find the market clearing prices for guns, butter, and oil.

  (b) How many guns and how much butter does each consumer consume?

  (c) How much oil does each firm use?
                     CHAPTER             19
                           TIME


In this chapter we discuss some topics having to do with the behavior
of a consumer and an economy over time. As we will see, behavior over
time can, in some cases, be regarded as a simple extension of the static
model discussed earlier. However, time also imposes some interesting spe-
cial structure on preferences and markets. Given the inherent uncertainty
of the future, it is natural to examine some issues involving uncertainty as
well.


19.1 Intertemporal preferences

Our standard theory of consumer choice is perfectly adequate to describe in-
tertemporal choice. The objects of c h o i c e t h e consumption bundles-will
now be streams of consumption over time. We assume that the consumer
has preferences over these consumption streams that satisfy the usual reg-
ularity conditions. It follows from the standard considerations that there
will generally exist a utility function that will represent those preferences.
  However, just as in the case of expected utility maximization, the fact
that we are considering a particular kind of choice problem will imply that
                         INTERTEMPORALOPTIMIZATION WITH TWO PERIODS        359


the preferences have a special structure that generates utility functions of
a particular form. One particularly popular choice is a utility function that
is additive over time, so that




Here ut(ct) is the utility of consumption in period t. This function can also
be further specialized t o the time-stationary form




In this case we use the same utility function in each period; however, period
t's utility is multiplied by a discount factor cu t .
   Note the close analogy with the expected utility structure. In that model,
the consumer has the same utility in each state of nature, and the utility
in each state of nature was multiplied by the probability that that state
would occur. Indeed, a mechanical rewording of the axioms of expected
utility theory can be used to justify time-additive utility functions of this
sort in terms of restrictions on the underlying preferences.
   Suppose that consumption possibilities in the future are uncertain. As
we've seen earlier, a natural set of axioms implies that we can choose a
representation of utility that is additive across states of nature. However,
it may easily be the case that one monotonic transform of utility is addi-
tive across states of nature and a dzfferent monotonic transform is additive
across time. There is no reason that there should be one representation of
preferences that is additive for both intertemporal and uncertain choices.
Despite this, the most common specification is to assume that the intertem-
poral utility function is additive across both time and states of nature. This
is not particularly realistic, but it does make for simpler calculations.


19.2 Intertemporal optimization with two periods

We have studied a simple two-period portfolio optimization model in Chap-
ter 11, page 184. Here we investigate how to extend this model to several
periods. This example serves to illustrate the method of d y n a m i c pro-
g r a m m i n g , a technique for solving multi-period optimization problems by
breaking them into two-period optimization problems.
   We first review the two-period model. Denote consumption in each of
the two periods by (cl, c z ) . The consumer has an initial endowment of
w l in period 1, and can invest his wealth in two assets. One asset pays
a certain return of a;       the other asset pays a random return of R ~ It. is
360 TIME (Ch. 19)

convenient to think of these returns as total returns; that is, one plus the
rate of return.
  Suppose that the consumer decides t o consume cl in the first period
and to invest a fraction x of his wealth in the risky asset and a fraction
1 - x in the certain asset. In this portfolio the consumer has (wl - cl)x
dollars earning a return R1 and (wl - c l ) ( l - x) dollars earning a return
&. Therefore, his second-period wealth-which equals his second-period
consumpt ion-is




               +
Here R = R l z &(l- x) is the consumer's portfolio return. Note that
it is, in general, a random variable since Rl is a random variable.
   Since the portfolio return is uncertain, the consumer's second-period
consumption is uncertain. We suppose that the consumer has a utility
function of the form




where cr < 1 is a discount factor.
 Let Vl(wl) be the maximum utility the consumer can achieve if he has
wealth wl in period 1:




The function Vl(wl) is essentially an indirect utility: it gives maximized
utility as a function of wealth.
   Differentiating equation (19.1) with respect t o cl and x, we have the
first-order conditions




Equation (19.2) is an intertemporal optimization condition: it says that the
marginal utility of consumption in period 1 must be equal to the discounted
expected marginal utility of consumption in period 2. Equation (19.3)
is a portfolio optimization condition: it says that the expected marginal
utility of moving a small amount of money from the safe to the risky asset
should be zero. We analyzed a similar first-order condition in Chapter 11,
page 184.
   Given these two equations in two unknowns, x and cl, we can, in prin-
ciple, solve for the optimal consumption and portfolio choice. We give an
example of this below as part of a solution to the T-period problem.
                        INTERTEMPORALOPTIMIZATION WITH SEVERAL PERIODS   361



19.3 Intertemporal optimization with several periods

Suppose now that there are T periods. If (El,. . . , ET) is some (possibly
random) stream of consumption, we assume that the consumer evaluates
it according to the utility function




If the consumer has wealth at time t of wt, and invests a fraction s t in the
                                      +
risky asset, his wealth in period t 1 is given by



                   +
where R = xtiil (1 - st)& is the (random) portfolio return between
               +
period t and t 1.
  In order to solve this intertemporal optimization problem, we use the
method of dynamic programming to break it into a sequence of two-
period optimization problems. Consider period T - 1. If the consumer has
wealth W T - ~ at this point, the maximum utility he can get is
                                                               -
    V T - ~ ( W ~ -=~ ) max        u(cT-~)4- ffEu[(W~-l- CT-~)R].     (19.4)
                       CT-I,XT-~



This is just equation (19.1) with T-1 replacing 1. The first-order conditions
are




  We have already seen how to solve this problem, in principle, and deter-
mine the indirect utility function VT-1(wT-1).
   Now go back to period T - 2. If the consumer chooses (CT-2, XT-z), then
in period T - 1 he will have (random) wealth of



From this wealth he will achieve an expected utility of VTP1(WT-1). Hence,
the consumer's maximization problem at period T - 2 can be written as



This is just like the problem (19.4), but "second-period" utility is given
by the indirect utility function V T - ~ ( W ~ - ~
                                              rather
                                                   ) than the direct utility
function.
    362 TIME (Ch. 19)

      The first-order conditions for period T - 2 are




    Again (19.7) is an intertemporal optimization condition: the marginal util-
    ity of current consumption has to equal the discounted indirect marginal
    utility of future wealth, and (19.8) is a portfolio optimization condition.
       We can use these conditions to solve for VT-2(~T-2)and so on. Given
    the indirect utility function &(wt) the T-period intertemporal optimization
    problem is just a sequence of two-period problems.


    EXAMPLE: Logarithmic utility

    Suppose that u(c) = log c. Then the first-order conditions (19.5) and (19.6)
    become

                   -1- - (YE          R       -          a
                                             --                           (19.9)
                   CT-1       [WT-1 - C T - ~ ] R   [WT-1- CT-l]



    Note that the portfolio return cancels out of equation (19.9), a very conve-
    nient property of logarithmic utility.
      Solving equation (19.9) for CT-1, we have




:   We substitute this into the objective function to determine the indirect
    utility function:




    Using the properties of the logarithm,



    Note the important feature that the indirect utility function VT-i is log-
    arithmic in wealth. The random return affects VTP1 additively; it doesn't
    influence the marginal utility of wealth, and therefore doesn't enter into
    the appropriate first-order conditions.
                                           GENEFAL EQUILIBRIUM OVER TIME     363


  It follows that the first-order conditions for period T - 2 will have the
form




   These are very similar t o the conditions for period T- 1;equation (19.11)
                          +
has an extra factor of 1 a on the right-hand side, and equation (19.12)
is exactly the same. It follows from this observation that each period the
consumer chooses the same portfolio he would choose if he were solving a
two-period problem and that the consumption choice in period T - 1 is
always proportional to wealth in that period.


19.4 General equilibrium over time

As mentioned earlier, the concept of a good in the Arrow-Debreu general
equilibrium model is very general. Goods can be distinguished by any
characteristic that agents care about. If agents care about when a good
is available, then goods that are available at different times should be re-
garded as different goods. If agents care about the circumstances under
which goods are available, then goods can be distinguished by the state of
nature in which they will be provided.
   When we distinguish goods in these ways, we can understand the role
of equilibrium prices in new and deeper ways. For example, let us con-
sider a simple general equilibrium model with one good, consumption, that
is available a t different times t = 1, . . . , T. In light of the preceeding re-
marks, we view this good as being T different goods, and let ct indicate
consumption available at time t .
   In a pure exchange model, agent i would be endowed with some con-
sumption at time t, &. In a production model, there would be a technol-
ogy available t o transform consumption at time t into consumption at other
times in the future. By sacrificing consumption at one time, the consumer
can enjoy consumption at some future time.
   Agents have preferences over consumption streams, and there are mar-
kets available for trading consumption at different points of time. One
way that such markets might be organized is through the use of Arrow-
D e b r e u securities. These are securities of a special form: security t pays
off $1 when date t arrives and zero at every other date. Securities of this
sort exist in the real world; they are known as p u r e discount bonds. A
pure discount bond pays off a certain amount of money (e.g., $10,000) at
a particular date.
364 TIME (Ch. 19)


   This model has all the pieces of the standard Arrow-Debreu model: pref-
erences, endowments, and markets. We can apply the standard existence
results to show that there must exist equilibrium prices (pt) for the Arrow-
Debreu securities that clear all markets. Note that pt is the price paid at
time zero for the delivery of the consumption good at time t. In this model
all the financial transaction take place at the beginning and consumption
is carried out over time.
   In real-life intertemporal markets we often use a different way to measure
future prices, namely interest rates. Imagine that there is a bank that
offers the following arrangement: for each dollar it receives at time 0 it will
      +
pay 1 rt dollars at time t. We say that the bank is offering an interest
rate of rt. What is the relationship between the interest rate rt and the
Arrow-Debreu price pt?
   Suppose that some agent holds one dollar at time 0. He may invest it in
                                    +
the bank, in which case he gets 1 rt dollars at time t. Alternatively, he
may invest the dollar in Arrow-Debreu security t. If the price of Arrow-
Debreu security t is pt, then he can buy l/pt units of it. Since each unit
of this security will be worth $1 at time t, it follows that he will have l/pt
dollars at time t. Clearly, the amount of money that the agent will have
at time t must be the same regardless of which investment plan he follows;
hence,



This means that interest rates are just the reciprocals of the Arrow-Debreu
prices, minus 1.
  We can use Arrow-Debreu prices to value consumption streams in the
usual way. For example, the budget constraint of a consumer takes the
form
                              T          T




Using the relationship between prices and interest rates, we can also write
this as




Hence, the budget constraint takes the form that the discounted present
value of consumption must equal the discounted present value of the en-
dowment.
  Given that the setup is exactly the same as the standard Arrow-Debreu
model described earlier, the same theorems hold: under various convexity
assumptions equilibrium will exist and be Pareto efficient.
                             GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM OVER STATES OF NATURE    365



Infinity

In many applications it does not seem appropriate to use a finite time
horizon, since agents might reasonably expect an economy t o continue "in-
definitely." However, if an infinite time period is used, certain difficulties
arise with the existence and welfare theorems.
   The first set of problems are technical ones: what is the appropriate
definition of a continuous function with an infinite number of arguments?
What is an appropriate fixed point theorem or separating hyperplane the-
orem? These questions can be addressed using various mathematical tools;
most of the issues that arise are purely technical in nature.
   However, there are also some fundamental peculiarities of models with
an infinite number of time periods. Perhaps the most famous example
comes in the overlapping generations model, which is also known as
the p u r e consumption-loan model. Consider an economy with the
following structure. Each period, n agents are born, each of whom lives
for two time periods. Hence, at any time after the first period 2 n agents
are alive: n young agents and n old agents. Each agent has an endowment
of 2 units of consumption when he is born, and is indifferent between
consumption when he is young and when he is old.
   In this simple case there is no problem with existence of equilibrium.
Clearly one equilibrium is for each agent to consume his endowment. This
equilibrium is supported by prices pt = 1 for all t . However, it turns out
that this equilibrium is not Pareto efficient!
                                                           +
   To see this, suppose that each member of generation t 1 transfers one
unit of its endowment t o generation t. Now generation 1 is better off
since it receives 3 units of consumption in its lifetime. None of the other
generations are worse off since they are compensated when they are old for
the transfers they made when they were young. This means that we have
found a Pareto improvement on the original equilibrium!
   It is worthwhile thinking about what goes wrong with the argument for
the First Welfare Theorem in the model. The problem is that there are an
infinite number of goods; if the equilibrium prices are all 1, then the value
of both the aggregate consumption stream and the aggregate endowment is
infinite. The contradiction in the last step of the proof of the First Welfare
Theorem no longer holds, and the proof fails.
   This example is very simple, but the phenomenon is quite robust. One
should be very careful in extrapolating results of models with finite horizons
to models with infinite horizons.


19.5 General equilibrium over states of nature
We have remarked earlier that agents may care about the circumstances,
or state of n a t u r e under which goods become available. After all, an
366 TIME (Ch. 19)

umbrella when it is raining is a very different good than when it is not
raining!
   Let us suppose that markets are open at time 0, but there is some un-
certainty about what will happen at time 1, when the trades are actually
supposed to be carried out. To be specific, suppose that there are two
possible states of nature at time 1, either it rains or it shines.
   Suppose that agents issue contingent contracts of the form: "Agent
i will deliver one unit of good j to the holder of this contract if and only
if it rains." The trade at time 0 is trade in contracts, that is, promises to
provide some good or service in the future, if some state of nature prevails.
   We can imagine that there is a market in these contracts and that at any
price vector for the contracts, agents can consult their preferences and their
technologies and determine how much they wish to demand and supply of
the various contracts. Note that contracts are traded and paid for at time
0 but will only be exercised at time 1 if the appropriate state of the world
occurs. As usual an equilibrium price vector is one where there is no excess
demand for any contract. From the viewpoint of the abstract theory the
contracts are just goods like any other goods. The standard existence and
efficiency results apply.
   It is important to understand the efficiency result correctly. Preferences
are defined over the space of lotteries. If the von Neumann-Morgenstern
axioms are met, the preferences over random events can be summarized
by an expected utility function. To say that there is no other feasible
allocation that makes all consumers better off is to say that there is no
pattern of contingent contracts that increases each agent's ezpected utility.
   There are real-life analogs of contingent contracts. Perhaps the most
common is insurance contracts. Insurance contracts offer to deliver a cer-
tain amount of money if and only if some event occurs. However, it must
be admitted that contingent contracts are rather rare in practice.

Notes

See Ingersoll (1987) for several worked-out examples of dynamic portfolio
optimization models. Geanakoplos (1987) has a nice survey of the overlap-
ping generations model.


Exercises

19.1. Consider the logarithmic utility example in Chapter 19, page 362.
Show that consumption in an arbitrary period t is given by
                                                                 Exercises   367

19.2. Consider the following scheme for "rent stabilization." Each year
landlords are allowed to increase their rents by 314 of the rate of inflation.
Owners of newly constructed apartments can set their initial rent a t any
price they please. Advocates of this plan claim that since the initial price
of new apartments can be set a t any level, the supply of new housing will
not be discouraged. Let us analyze this claim in a simple model.
   Suppose that apartments last for 2 periods. Let r be the nominal rate
of interest and .rr be the rate of inflation. Assume that in the absence of
rent stabilization the rent in period 1 will be p and the rent in period 2
          +
will be (1 ~ ) p .Let c be the constant marginal cost of constructing new
apartments and let the demand function for apartments in each period be
given by D ( p ) . Finally, let K be the supply of rent controlled apartments.

   (a) In the absence of rent stabilization, what must be the equilibrium
relationship between the period 1 rental price p and the marginal cost of
constructing a new apartment?

  (b) If the rent stabilization plan is adopted, what will this relationship
have to be?

  (c) Draw a simple supply-demand diagram and illustrate the number of
new apartments without rent stabilization.

  (d) Will the rent stabilization plan result in more or fewer new apart-
ments being built?

  (e) Will the equilibrium price of new apartments be higher or lower
under this rent stabilization plan?
                      CHAPTER             20
                    ASSET
                   MARKETS

The study of asset markets demands a general equilibrium approach. As we
will see below, the equilibrium price of a given asset depends critically on
how its value correlates with the values of other assets. Hence, the study of
multi-asset pricing inherently involves general equilibrium considerations.


20.1 Equilibrium with certainty
In the study of asset markets the focus is on what determines the differences
in prices of assets. In a world of certainty, the analysis of asset markets is
very simple: the price of an asset is simply the present discounted value of
its stream of returns. If this were not so, there would be a possibility for
riskless arbitrage.
   Consider, for example, a two-period model. We suppose that there is
some asset that earns a sure total return of Ro. That is, one dollar
invested in asset 0 today will pay Ro dollars next period for certain. If Ro
is the total return on asset 0, ro = Ro - 1 is the rate of return.
   There is another asset a that will have a value Va next period. What
will be the equilibrium price of asset a today?
370 ASSET MARKETS (Ch. 20)

terms in terms of "fundamentals" such as consumer preferences and the
pattern of asset returns.
   This analysis involves considerations of general equilibrium since the
value of a risky asset inherently depends on the presence or absence of
other risky assets which serve as complements or substitutes with the asset
in question. Therefore, in most models of asset pricing, the value of an
asset ends up depending on how it covaries with other assets.
  What is surprising is how generally this insight emerges in models that
are seemingly very different. In this chapter we will derive and compare
several models of asset pricing.



20.3 Notation

We collect here the notation we will use in this chapter. This will make
it easy to look back and remind yourself of the definitions of various sym-
bols as needed. Some of the terms will be defined in more detail in the
appropriate section.
   We will generally consider a two-period model, with the present being
period 0. The values of the various assets in period 1 are uncertain. We
model this uncertainty using the notion of states of nature. That is, we
suppose that there are various possible outcomes indexed by s = 1,. . . , S,
and the value of each of the assets next period depends on which outcome
actually occurs.


i     individual investor, i = 1,. . . , I
Wi      wealth of investor i in period 0
ci     consumption in period 0
Wi - ci      amount invested in period 0 by investor i
s     states of nature s = 1,. . . , S in the second period
.rrs the probability of occurrence of state s. We assume that all con-
sumers have the same probability beliefs; this is the case of homogeneous
expectations.
Cis     consumption by individual i in state s in the second period
c   consumption by individual i in the second period regarded as a ran-
dom variable
   Note that we can view consumption in two different ways: either as the
list of possible consumptions in each state of nature, (Ci,),or as the random
variable Ci,  which takes on the value (Cis)with probabilities .rrs.
                                             THE CAPITAL ASSET PRICING MODEL   371


       +
u ~ ( Q ) 6 ~ u i ( & ) von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function for in-
vestor i. Note that we assume that this function is additively separable
over time with discount factor 6.
pa    price of asset a for a = 0,. . . , A
Xi,     amount purchased of asset a by investor i
xi,   fraction of investor i's investment wealth that is held in asset a. If Wi
is the total amount invested in all assets, xia = paXia/Wi, and therefore
~ f xia== 1.~
(xio,. . . ,xi*) portfolio of assets held by investor i. Note that a portfolio
is denoted by the fraction of wealth invested in each of the given assets.
V,,    value of asset a in state of nature s in the second period
pa    value of asset a in the second period regarded as a random variable
R,,     the (total) return on asset a in state s. By definition, R,, = V,,/p,.
R,   the total return on asset a regarded as a random variable. The
random variable R, takes on the value R,, with probability T,.
-      s
R, = CSEl  n,R,, = ER, the expected return on asset a
I&,    the total return on a risk-free asset
g a b = COV(R,,   Rb)   the covariance between the returns on assets a and b




20.4 The Capital Asset Pricing Model


We will analyze the various models of asset markets in roughly historical
order, so we start with the grandfather of them all, the celebrated Capital
Asset Pricing Model, or C A P M . The CAPM starts with a particu-
lar specification of utility, namely that utility of a random distribution of
wealth depends only on the first two moments of the probability distribu-
tion, the mean and the variance.
   This is compatible with the expected utility model only in certain cir-
cumstances; for example, when all assets are Normally distributed, or when
the expected utility function is quadratic. However, the mean-variance may
serve as a rough approximation to a general utility function in a broader
variety of cases. In this context "risk aversion" means that an increase in
expected consumption is a good and an increase in the variance of con-
sumption is a bad.
   We first derive the budget constraint. A similar budget constraint will be
used in several of the models we examine. Omitting the investor subscript
372 ASSET MARKETS (Ch. 20)


i for notational convenience, second-period consumption is given by




                                                                 A
Since the portfolio weights must sum to one, so that xo = 1 - C a = , x,, we
can also write the budget constraint as




   The expression in square brackets is the portfolio return. Given our
assumptions about the mean-variance utility function, whatever the level
of investment, the investor would like t o have the least possible variance
of the portfolio return for a given expected value. That is, the investor
would like t o purchase a portfolio that is mean-variance efficient. Which
portfolio is actually chosen will depend on the investor's utility function;
but whatever it is, it must minimize variance for a given level of expected
return.
   Before proceeding further, let us examine the first-order conditions for
this minimization problem. We want to minimize the variance of the port-
folio return subject to the constraints that we achieve a specified expected
return, 3,and that we satisfy the budget constraint   ~t~~   xa = 1.




                                      A
                         such that   C xa-R, = -R
                                     a=O
                                     A




In this problem we allow x, t o be positive or negative. This means that
the consumer can hold a long or a short position in any asset, including
the riskless asset.
  Letting X be the Lagrange multiplier for the first constraint and p the
Lagrange multiplier for the second constraint, the first-order conditions
take the form




Since the objective function is convex and the constraints are linear, the
second-order conditions are automatically satisfied.
                                            THE CAPITAL ASSET PRICING M O D E L    373

   These first-order conditions can be used to derive a nice equation de-
scribing the pattern of expected returns. The derivation that we use is
elegant, but somewhat roundabout. Let (x;,. . . ,x%) be some portfolio
consisting entirely of risky assets that is known to be mean-variance effi-
cient. Suppose that one of the risky assets available to the investors-say
asset e-is a "mutual fund" that holds this efficient portfolio (xz). Then
the portfolio that invests 0 in every asset except for asset e and 1 in asset
e is mean-variance efficient. This means that such a portfolio must satisfy
the conditions given in equation (20.4) for each asset a = 0,. . . , A.
   Noting that for this portfolio xt, = 0 for b # e, we see that the a t h
first-order condition becomes



Two special cases occur when a = 0 and when a = e:




When a = 0, uaeis zero since asset 0 is not risky. When a = e, a,, = gee
since the covariance of a variable with itself is simply the variance of the
random variable.
   Solving these two equations for X and p yields




Substituting these values back into (20.5) and rearranging yields




   This equation says that the expected return on any asset is equal to the
risk-free rate plus a "risk premium" that depends on the covariance of the
asset's return with some efficient portfolio of risky assets. This equation
must hold for any efficient portfolio of risky assets.
   In order to give this equation empirical content, we need to be able to
identify some particular efficient portfolio. In order to do this we examine
the structure of the efficient portfolios graphically. In Figure 20.1 we have
plotted the expected returns and the standard deviations that can be
generated by some particular set of risky assets.l The set of mean-standard

  The standard deviation of a random variable is just the square root of its variance.
         374 ASSET MARKETS (Ch. 20)


         deviation efficient portfolios that consist entirely of risky assets can be
         shown to have the hyperbolic shape depicted in Figure 20.1, but the fact
         that it has this particular shape isn't necessary for the following argument.
            We want to construct the set of efficient portfolios that use both the risky
         assets and the risk-free asset. To do this draw the line that passes through
         the risk-free rate & and just touches the hyperbola in Figure 20.1. Call
         the point where it touches this set (&,a,).        This point is the expected
         return and standard deviation of some portfolio we shall call portfolio m.
         I claim that every combination of expected return and standard deviation
         on this straight line can be achieved by taking convex combinations of two
         portfolios: the risk-free portfolio and portfolio m.
            For example, to construct a portfolio that has an expected return of
         $(& - &) and a standard deviation of $urn, we simply put half of our
         wealth in portfolio m and half in the riskless asset. This shows how to
         achieve any mean-standard deviation combination to the left of (G,urn).
         To generate return combinations to the right of the point (%,urn), we
         have to borrow money at the rate & and invest it in portfolio m.


          EXPECTED                      Efflclent portfollos wlth
          RETURN     Eff~cient
                                        rlsky and risk-free assets

                          ,
                     assets




                                                STANDARD DEVIATION
                          om

Figure         Set of risky returns and standard deviations. All mean-
20.1           variance efficient portfolios can be constructed by combining the
               portfolios whose returns are & and &.




           This geometric argument shows that the structure of the set of efficient
         portfolios is very simple indeed: it can be constructed entirely of two port-
         folios, one being the portfolio consisting of the riskless asset and one being
         portfolio m. The only remaining issue is to give empirical content to this
         particular portfolio of risky assets.
                                        THE CAPITAL ASSET PRICING MODEL   375


   Let the fraction of wealth invested in asset a in portfolio m be denoted
by 2,". Of course, we must have   ~ t = ~
                                        x," = 1. Let Wi denote the amount
of wealth that individual i invests in the risky portfolio. Let Xi, be the
number of shares that individual i invests in risky asset a, and let pa denote
the price of asset a. Since each investor holds the same portfolio of risky
assets, we must have
                        m    = Xia
                                 p    f~o r i = l , . . . , I .
                       Xa
                               wi
Multiply each side of this equation by Wi and sum over i to find



The numerator of this expression is the total market value of asset a. The
denominator is the total value of all risky assets. Hence, x," is just the
fraction of wealth invested in risky assets that is invested in asset a. This
portfolio is known as the market portfolio of risky assets. This is a
potentially observable portfolio--as long as we can measure the aggregate
holdings of risky assets.
   Since the market portfolio of risky assets is one particular mean-standard
deviation efficient portfolio, we can rewrite equation (20.6) as
                        -            'Jam -
                        Ra=Ro+-(Rm-Ro).
                                     'Jmm
This is the fundamental result of the CAPM. It gives empirical content to
the risk premium: the risk premium is the covariance of asset a with the
market portfolio divided by the variance of the market portfolio times the
excess return on the market portfolio.
   The term aam/ammcan be recognized as the theoretical regression coef-
ficient resulting from a regression of & on &. For this reason, this term
is typically written as Pa. Making this substitution gives us the final form
of the CAPM:              -
                           Ra=Ro+Pa(Rn-Ro).                             (20.7)
   The CAPM says that to determine the expected return on any asset, we
simply need to know that asset's "beta2'-its covariance with the market
portfolio. Note that the variance of the asset return is irrelevant; it is not
the "own risk" of an asset that matters, but how this return on an asset
contributes to the overall portfolio risk of the agents. Since everybody
holds the same portfolio of risky assets in the CAPM model, the risk that
matters is how an asset influences the riskiness of the market portfolio.
   The appealing feature of the CAPM is that it involves things that appear
to be empirically observable: the expected return on the market portfolio
of risky assets, and the regression coefficient of a regression relating the
return on a specific asset and the return on the market portfolio. However,
it must be remembered that the relevant theoretical construction is the
portfolio of all risky assets; this may not be so easy to observe.
376 ASSET MARKETS (Ch. 20)



20.5 The Arbitrage Pricing Theory
The CAPM starts with a specification of consumer tastes; the Arbitrage
Pricing Theory (APT) starts with a specification of the process generating
asset returns. In this sense the CAPM is a demand-side model, while the
APT is a supply-side model.
   It is commonly observed that most asset prices move together; that is,
there is a high degree of covariance among asset prices. It is natural to think
of writing the returns on assets as a function of a few common factors and
some asset-specific risks. If there are only two factors, for example, we
could write


   Here we think of (fl, f2) as being "macroeconomic," economy-wide fac-
tors that influence all asset returns. Each asset a has a particular "sensitiv-
ity" bia to factor i. The asset-specific risk, Ca, is, by definition, independent
of the economy wide factors fl and f2.
                                                                     i,
   Because of the presence of the "constant term" boa,the factors i = 1,2
and the asset-specific risks, Ca for a = 1,.. . ,A, can always be assumed to
have a zero expectation. (If the expectations aren't zero, just incorporate
them into boa.) We also suppose that the ~ f = ~                   f is~that the
                                                              0, that
factors are truly independent factors.
   Let us first examine some special cases of the APT in which there is no
asset-specific risk. We start with the case in which there is only one risk
factor, so that
                                +
                       R, = boa blafl for a = 0,.. . ,A.
As usual, we seek to explain the expected returns on the assets in terms
of a risk premium. By construction, we have        = boa, so this reduces to
examining the behavior of boa for a = 1,. . . , A.
   Suppose that we construct a portfolio of two assets a and b where we
hold x in asset a and 1 - x in asset b. The return on this portfolio will be



Let us choose x* so that the second term in brackets is zero. This implies
                                         blb
                                x* =
                                  bib - h a     '


Note that to do this we must assume blb # bla, which means that assets a
and b do not have the same sensitivity.
  The resulting portfolio is by construction a riskless portfolio. Hence, its
return must be equal to the risk-free rate, which implies that
                                          THE ARBITRAGE PRICING THEORY    377




Substituting from equation (20.8) and rearranging, we have




Interchanging the role of a and b in this argument gives us




Observe that the right-hand sides of equations (20.9) and (20.10) are the
same. Since this is true for all assets a and b, it follows that

                               boa - Ro = Al
                                  bla

for some constant )rl for all assets a. Using the fact that Ra = boa and
rearranging gives us the final form of the one-factor APT:



   Equation (20.11) says that the expected return on any asset a is the risk-
free rate plus a risk premium which is given by the sensitivity of asset a to
the common risk factor times a constant. The constant can be interpreted
as the risk premium paid on a portfolio that has sensitivity 1 to the kind
of risk represented by factor 1.


Two factors

Suppose now that we consider a two-factor model:



Now we construct a portfolio (x,, xb, x,) with three assets a, b, and c which
satisfies three equations:




The first equation says that the portfolio eliminates the risk from factor 1,
the second equation says that the portfolio eliminates the risk from factor 2,
378 ASSET MARKETS (Ch. 20)


and the third equation says that the sum of the asset shares is 1-that we
do indeed have a portfolio.
   It follows that this portfolio has zero risk. Therefore it must earn the
                          +        +
riskless return, so xaboa xbbob xcbOc= a . Writing these conditions in
matrix form gives us

            (boai&        bob - Ro     o   - Ro
                             blb
                             bzb           blc
                                           b2c    ) (;) (i)=

The vector (x,, xa, x,) does not consist of all zeroes since it sums to 1. It
follows that the matrix on the left must be singular. If the last two rows
are not collinear (which we will assume), it must be that the first row is a
linear combination of the last two rows. That is, each entry on the top row
is a linear combination of the corresponding entries in the next two rows.
This implies that
           -
           Ra - Ro = blJ1     + bzaX2 for all a = 1,. . . , A .        (20.12)

  The X's have the same interpretation as before: they are the excess
returns on portfolios that have sensitivity 1 to the particular type of risk
indicated by the appropriate factor. This is the natural generalization of
the 1-factor case: the excess return on asset a depends on its sensitivity to
the two risky factors.



Asset-specific risk

We have seen that if the number of factors is small relative to the number of
assets, and there are no asset-specific risks, then it is possible to construct
riskless portfolios. These riskless portfolios must earn the riskless return,
which puts certain restrictions on the set of expected returns.
   But the constructions of these riskless portfolios of risky assets can only
be accomplished if all risk is due to the macroeconomic factors. What
happens if there is asset-specific risk in addition to economy-wide risk?
   By definition asset-specific risks are independent of the economy-wide
risk factors, and are independent of each other. The Law of Large Num-
bers then implies that the risk of a highly diversified portfolio of firms must
involve very little asset-specific risk. This argument suggests that we can
ignore the asset-specific risks, and that the linear relationship of expected
returns to factors can still be expected to hold, at least as a good approxi-
mation. The interested reader can consult the references given at the end
of the chapter for the details of this argument.
                                                            EXPECTED UTILITY        379



20.6 Expected utility

Let us now consider a model of asset pricing based on intertemporal ex-
pected utility maximization. Consider the following two-period problem:


        max         u(c)+aE
      CIXlr...rXA



Again, we have dropped the subscript for investor i for notational conve-
nience.
  This problem asks us to determine first-period savings, W - c, and the
portfolio investment pattern, ( x l , . . . , x A ) , SO as to maximize discounted
expected utility.
  Letting R = (&         + zA
                          a= 1 za(Ra - &)) be the portfolio return, and
6 = ( W - c ) ~ ,we can write the first-order condition for this problem as
                ul(t) = QEU/(C)R
                     0 = E ~ I ( C ) ( R ,- &)   for a = 1,.. . , A .

The first condition says that the marginal utility of consumption in the
first period should equal the discounted expected marginal utility of con-
sumption in the second period. The second set of conditions say that the
expected marginal utility from shifting the portfolio away from the safe
asset into asset a must be zero for all assets a = 1 , . . . , A .
   Let us focus on the second set of conditions and see what their implica-
tions are for asset pricing. Using the covariance identity, from Chapter 26,
page 486, we can write these conditions as

EU'(C)(R,-&)         = COV(U'(C),
                              R,)+Eu~(c)(R,-&)              =   o for a = 1 , .. . , A .
Rearranging, we have




This equation is reminiscent of the pricing equation from the CAPM, equa-
tion (20.7), but with a few differences. Now the risk premium depends on
the covariance with marginal utility, rather than with the market portfolio
of risky assets.
   If an asset is positively correlated with consumption, then it will be
negatively correlated with the marginal utility of consumption, since ull <
0. This means that it will have a positive risk premium-it must command
a higher expected return in order to be held. Just the reverse holds for
assets that are negatively correlated with consumption.
380 ASSET MARKETS (Ch. 20)

  As it stands, this equation holds only for an individual investor i. How-
ever, under certain conditions, the condition can be aggregated. For exam-
ple, suppose that all assets are Normally distributed. Then consumption
will also be Normally distributed, and we can apply a theorem due to
Rubinstein (1976) which says



Applying this to equation (20.13), and adding the subscript i to distinguish
the individual investors, we have

                   -: = & + ( -
                   R                   - )COV(~,&).
                                   EU:(~~)
                                   Eu: (C,)

The term multiplying the covariance is sometimes known as the global
risk aversion of agent i. Exploiting this analogy, we will denote it by ri.
Cross-multiplying equation (20.14), we have




Summing over all investors i = 1,. . . ,I,and using 6 =    c:=,
                                                              ei to denote
aggregate consumption gives us




This can also be written as




Now the risk premium is proportional to the covariance of aggregate con-
sumption and the asset return. The proportionality factor is a measure of
average risk aversion.
  We can also express this proportionality factor as the excess return on a
particular asset. Suppose that there is an asset c that is perfectly correlated
with aggregate consumption. (This asset may itself be a portfolio of other
assets.) Then the return on this asset c, R,, must satisfy equation (20.15):
                                                       EXPECTED UTILITY   381


Solving this equation for the average risk aversion, we have



This allows us to rewrite the asset pricing equation (20.15) as


   The ratio of covariances in this expression is sometimes known as the
consumption beta of an asset. It is the theoretical regression coefficient
between the return on asset a and the return on an asset that is perfectly
correlated with aggregate consumption. It has the same interpretation as
the "market beta" in our study of the CAPM. In fact, the resemblance
between (20.16) and (20.7) is so striking that one wonders whether there
is really any difference between them.
   In a two-period model there isn't. If there are only two periods, then
aggregate wealth (that is, the market portfolio) in the second period is
equal to aggregate consumption. However, in a multiperiod model, wealth
and consumption may differ.
   Although we derived our equation in a two-period model, it is actually
valid in a multiperiod model. To see this, consider the following experiment.
In period t move a dollar from the safe asset into asset a. In period t 1 +
change your consumption by an amount equal to za(Ra - &). If you have
an optimal consumption plan, the expected utility from this action must
be zero. But this condition and Normality of the return distribution were
the only conditions we used to derive (20.16)!


EXAMPLE: Expected utility and the APT
Since the APT places restrictions on the characteristics of the returns, and
the expected utility model only places restrictions on the preferences, we
can combine the results of the two models to provide an interpretation of
the factor-specific risks.
  The expected utility model in (20.13) says



and the APT postulates
                         ~a = boa + bla.fl +b2af2.
Substituting this equation into equation (20.13) gives us


Comparing this to equation (20.12), we see that XI and X2 are propor-
tional to the covariance between marginal utility of consumption and the
appropriate factor risk.
382 ASSET MARKETS (Ch. 20)



20.7 Complete markets
We consider now a different model of asset valuation. Suppose that there
are S different states of nature and for each state of nature s there is an
asset that pays off $1 if state s occurs and zero otherwise. An asset of this
form is known as an Arrow-Debreu security. Let p, be the equilibrium
price of Arrow-Debreu security s.
   Now consider an arbitrary asset a with value Vasin state s. How much is
this asset worth in period O? Consider the following argument: construct
a portfolio holding V, units of Arrow-Debreu security s. Since Arrow-
Debreu security s is worth $1 in state s, this portfolio will be worth Va,
in state s. Hence, this portfolio has exactly the same pattern of payoffs as
asset a. It follows from arbitrage considerations that the value of asset a
must be the same as the value of this portfolio. Hence,




This argument shows that the value of any asset can be determined from
the values of the Arrow-Debreu assets.
  Letting IT,be the probability of state s, we can write




where E is the expectation operator. This formula says that the value of
asset a is the expectation of the product of the value of asset a and the
random variable (p/r). Using the covariance identity, from Chapter 26,
page 486, we can rewrite this expression as



By definition



Hence, E($/ii) is the value of a portfolio that pays off $1 for certain next
period. Letting & be the risk-free return on such a portfolio, we have



Substituting this into equation (20.18) and rearranging slightly, we have
                                                         PURE ARBITRAGE   383

Hence the value of asset a must be its discounted expected value plus a
risk premium.
   All of this is simply manipulating definitions; now we add a behavioral
assumption. If agent i purchases cis units of Arrow-Debreu security s, he
must satisfy the first-order condition

                                      = Aps,
                              ~s'11:(~s)



                                  Xi      rs
It follows that p,/rs must be proportional t o the marginal utility of con-
sumption of investor i. The left-hand side of this expression is a strictly
decreasing function of consumption, due t o risk aversion. Let fi be the
inverse of u:/Ai; this is also a decreasing function. We can then write



Summing over i, and using C, to denote aggregate consumption in state s
we have
                                    I




Since each fi is a decreasing function, the right-hand side of this expression
is a decreasing function. Hence, it has an inverse F, so we can write



where F(C,) is a decreasing function of aggregate consumption.
 Substituting this into (20.19) we have




Hence, the value of asset a is the discounted expected value adjusted by a
risk premium that depends on the covariance of the value of the asset with
a decreasing function of aggregate consumption. Assets that are positively
correlated with aggregate consumption will have a negative adjustment;
assets that are negatively correlated will have a positive adjustment, just
as in the other models.


20.8 Pure arbitrage
Finally, we consider an asset-pricing model with the absolute minimum
of assumptions: we only require that there be no opportunities for pure
arbitrage.
384 ASSET MARKETS (Ch. 20)


  Arrange the set of assets as an A x S matrix where the entry Ka measures
the value of asset a in state of nature s. Call this matrix V. Let X =
(XI,. . . XA) be a pattern of holdings of the A assets. Then the value of
this pattern of investment second period will be an S-vector given by the
matrix product VX.
  Suppose that X results in a nonnegative payoff in every state of nature:
VX 2 0. Then it seems reasonable to suppose that the value of this in-
                                                               >
vestment pattern should be nonnegative: that is, that pX 0. Otherwise,
there would be an obvious arbitrage opportunity. We state this condition
as
No arbitrage principle. If VX 2 0, then pX 2 0.

  This is essentially a requirement that there be "no free lunches." It turns
out that one can show that the no arbitrage principle implies that there
                                 >
exists a set of "state price" ps 0, for s = 1 , . . . , S, such that the value of
any asset a is given by
                                       S




  Since the proof is not directly of interest to us, we give it in an appendix.
Here we explore the implications of this condition for asset pricing.
  Recalling that T, measures the probability that state s occurs, we can
write equation (20.21) as




The right-hand side of this equation is just the expectation of the product
of two random variables. Let 2 be the random variable that takes on the
values ps/xs, and let Va be the random variable that takes on the values
Vas.
   Then, applying the covariance identity, we have



By definition
                                 S             S




The right-hand side of this expression is the value of a security that pays 1
in each state of n a t u r e t h a t is, it is the value of a riskless bond. By
definition, this value is I/&.
  Making this substitution and rearranging, we have
                                                                       Notes 385

Dividing through by pa to convert this to an expression involving asset
returns yields        -
                      R, = & - R ~ c o ~ ( Z
                                           R,).,
From this equation, we see that under very general conditions the risk
premium for each asset depends on the covariance of asset return with a
single random v a r i a b l e t h e same one for all assets.
   In the different models we have investigated we have found different
expressions for 2. In the case of the CAPM, 2 was the return on the
market portfolio of risky assets. In the case of the consumption-beta model,
2 was the marginal utility of consumption. In the Arrow-Debreu model,
2is a particular function of aggregate consumption.


APPENDIX
We want to show that the No Arbitrage Principle given in the text implies the
existence of the nonnegative state prices (pl,. . . , ps). In order to attack this
question, let us consider the following linear programming problem:

                                    min pX
                              such that V X 2 0.

This linear program problem asks us to find the cheapest portfolio that gives a
vector of all nonnegative returns. Certainly X = 0 is a feasible choice for this
problem, and the No Arbitrage Principle implies that it indeed minimizes the
objective function. Thus the linear programming problem has a finite solution.
  The dual of this linear program is

                                    max Op
                               such that pV = p,

where p is the S-dimensional nonnegative vector of dual variables. Since the
primal has a finite feasible solution, so does the dual. Thus we have found that
a necessary implication of the No Arbitrage Condition is that there must exist a
nonnegative S-dimensional vector p such that

                                    p = pv.


Notes

Our treatment of the CAPM follows Ross (1977). The APT model is due
to Ross (1976); the treatment here follows Ingersoll (1987). The asset
pricing formula for the Arrow-Debreu model follows Rubinstein (1976).
The pure arbitrage analysis follows Ross (1978), but we use the proof from
Ingersoll (1987).
386 ASSET MARKETS (Ch. 20)



Exercises

20.1. The first-order condition for portfolio choice in the expected utility
model was ~ ~ ' (  (R,6-)&) = 0 for all assets a. Show that this could also
be written as EU~(C)(R,   - R ~= ) 0 for any assets a and b.
20.2. Write equation (20.20) in terms of the rate of return on asset a.
                     CHAPTER             21
           EQUILIBRIUM
            ANALYSIS

In this chapter we discuss some topics in general equilibrium analysis that
don't conveniently fit in the other chapters. Our first topic concerns the
core, a generalization of the Pareto set, and its relationship to Walrasian
equilibrium. We follow this by a brief discussion of the relationship between
convexity and size. Following this we discuss conditions under which there
will be only one Walrasian equilibrium. Finally, the chapter ends with a
discussion of the stability of general equilibrium.


21.1 The core of an exchange economy

We have seen that Walrasian equilibria will generally exist and that they
will generally be Pareto efficient. But the use of a competitive market
mechanism system is only one way to allocate resources. What if we used
some other social institution to facilitate trade? Would we still end up with
an allocation that was "close to" a Walrasian equilibrium?
  In order to examine this question we consider a "market game" where
each agent i comes to the market with an initial endowment of w,. Instead
388 EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS (Ch. 21)


of using a price mechanism, the agents simply wander around and make
tentative arrangements to trade with each other. When all agents have
made the best arrangement possible for themselves, the trades are carried
out.
   As described so far the game has very little structure. Instead of specify-
ing the game in sufficient detail to calculate an equilibrium we ask a more
general question. What might be a "reasonable" set of outcomes for this
game? Here is a set of definitions that may be useful in thinking about this
question.

Improve upon an allocation. A group of agents S is said to improve
upon a given allocation x i f there is some allocation x' such that



and
                           xi ti xi   for all i E S.

  If an allocation x can be improved upon, then there is some group of
agents that can do better by not engaging in the market at all; they would
do better by only trading among themselves. An example of this might
be a group of consumers who organize a cooperative store to counteract
high prices at the grocery store. It seems that any allocation that can be
improved upon does not seem like a reasonable equilibrium-some group
would always have an incentive to split off from the rest of the economy.

Core of an economy.         A feasible allocation x is i n the core of the
economy if it cannot be improved upon by any coalition.

   Notice that, if x is in the core, x must be Pareto efficient. For if x were
not Pareto efficient, then the coalition consisting of the entire set of agents
could improve upon x. In this sense the core is a generalization of the idea
of the Pareto set. If an allocation is in the core, every group of agents gets
some part of the gains from t r a d e n o group has an incentive to defect.
   One problem with the concept of the core is that it places great informa-
tional requirements on the agents-the people in the dissatisfied coalition
have to be able to find each other. Furthermore, it is assumed that there
are no costs to forming coalitions so that, even if only very small gains can
be made by forming coalitions, they will nevertheless be formed.
   A geometrical picture of the core can be obtained from the standard
Edgeworth box diagram for the two-person, two-good case. See Figure 21.1.
In this case the core will be the subset of the Pareto set a t which each agent
does better than by refusing to trade.
   Will the core of an economy generally be nonempty? If we continue t o
make the assumptions that ensure the existence of a market equilibrium,
it will, since the market equilibrium is always contained in the core.
                                       THE CORE OF AN EXCHANGE ECONOMY        389

           4                                           CONSUMER 2

GOOD 2




     CONSUMER 1                                            w
                                                       GOOD 1

         Core in an Edgeworth box. In the Edgeworth box dia-                        Figure
         gram, the core is simply that segment of the Pareto set that               21.1
         lies between the indifference curves that pass through the initial
         endowment.

Walrasian equilibrium is in core. If (x*,p) is a Walrasian equilibrium
with initial endowments w i , then x* is i n the core.

Proof. Assume not; then there is some coalition S and some feasible allo-
cation x' such that all agents i in S strictly prefer xi to x: and furthermore




But the definition of the Walrasian equilibrium implies

                             pxi > pui    for all i in S




which contradicts the first equality. I

   We can see from the Edgeworth box diagram that generally there will
be other points in the core than just the market equilibrium. However, if
we allow our Zperson economy to grow we will have more possible coali-
tions and hence more opportunities to improve upon any given allocation.
Therefore, one might suspect that the core might shrink as the economy
grows. One problem with formalizing this idea is that the core is a subset of
the allocation space and thus as the economy grows the core keeps changing
dimension. Thus we want to limit ourselves t o a particularly simple type
of growth.
390 EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS (Ch. 21)


  We will say two agents are of the same type if both their preferences and
their initial endowments are the same. We will say that one economy is a
replica of another if there are r times as many agents of each type in one
economy as in the other. This means that if a large economy replicates a
smaller one, it is just a "scaled up" version of the small one. For simplicity
we will limit ourselves to only two types of agents, type A and type B.
Consider a fixed 2-person economy; by the r-core of this economy, we mean
the core of the r t h replication of the original economy.
  It turns out that all agents of the same type must receive the same bundle
at any core allocation. This result makes for a much simpler analysis.

Equal treatment in the core. Suppose agents' preferences are strictly
convex, strongly monotonic, and continuous. Then i f x is an allocation in
the r-core of a given economy, then any two agents of the same type must
receive the same bundle.

Proof. Let x be an allocation in the core and index the 2r agents using
subscripts A l , . . . , A T and B l , . . . , B r . If all agents of the same type do
not get the same allocation, there will be one agent of each type who is
most poorly treated. We will call these two agents the "type-A underdog"
and the "type-B underdog." If there are ties, select any of the tied agents.
  Let SIA = Ciz1XA, and SIB =                             XB, be the average bundle of
the type-A and type-B agents. Since the allocation x is feasible, we have




It follows that
                              -
                              XA+%B =UA+Ug,

so that (FA,XB) is feasible for the coalition consisting of the two underdogs.
We are assuming that at least for one type, say type A, two of the type-A
agents receive different bundles. Hence, the A underdog will strictly prefer
-
XA to his present allocation by strict convexity of preferences (since it is
a weighted average of bundles that are at least as good as xA),and the B
underdog will think xB is at least as good as his present bundle. Strong
monotonicity and continuity allows A to remove a little from FA, and bribe
the type-B underdog, thus forming a coalition that can improve upon the
allocation.

  Since any allocation in the core must award agents of the same type
with the same bundle, we can examine the cores of replicated two-agent
economies by use of the Edgeworth box diagram. Instead of a point x in
                                    THE CORE OF AN EXCHANGE ECONOMY      391


the core representing how much A gets and how much B gets, we think of
x as telling us how much each agent of type A gets and how much each
agent of type B gets. The above lemma tells us that all points in the r-core
can be represented in this manner.
  The following proposition shows that any allocation that is not a market
equilibrium allocation must eventually not be in the r-core of the economy.
This means that core allocations in large economies look just like Walrasian
equilibria.

Shrinking core. Assume that preferences are strictly convex and strongly
monotonic, and that there is a unique market equilibrium x* from initial
endowment w. Then if y is not the market equilibrium, there is some
replication r such that y is not in the r-core.

Proof. Refer to the Edgeworth box in Figure 21.2. We want to show that
a point like y can eventually be improved upon. Since y is not a Walrasian
equilibrium, the line segment through y and w must cut at least one agent's
indifference curve through y. Thus it is possible to choose a point such as g
which, for example, agent A prefers to y. There are several cases to treat,
depending on the location of g; however, the arguments are essentially the
same, so we treat only the case depicted.



       GOOD 1
       4                                             TYPE 8




                                                           7 GOOD 2
     TYPEA                                           W
                                                  GOOD 1


     The shrinking core. As the economy replicates, a point like                Figure
     y will eventually not be in the core.                                      21.2


  Since g is on the line segment connecting y and w, we can write
392 EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS (Ch. 21)


for some 8 > 0. By continuity of preference, we can also suppose that
8 = T / V for some integers T and V. Hence,




   Suppose the economy has replicated V times. Then form a coalition
consisting of V consumers of type A and V - T consumers of type B , and
consider the allocation z where agents of type A in the coalition receive
g~ and agents of type B receive y ~ .  This allocation is preferred t o y by
all members of the coalition (we can remove a little from the A agents and
give it to the B agents to get strict preference). We will show that it is
feasible for the members of the coalition. This follows from the following
calculation:




This is exactly the endowment of our coalition since it has V agents of type
A and (V - T) agents of type B. Thus, this coalition can improve upon y ,
proving the proposition. I

   Many of the restrictive assumptions in this proposition can be relaxed. In
particular we can easily get rid of the assumptions of strong monotonicity
and uniqueness of the market equilibrium. Convexity appears to be crucial
to the proposition, but, as in the existence theorem, that assumption is
unnecessary for large economies. Of course, we can also allow for there to
be more than only two types of agents.
   In the study of Walrasian equilibrium we found that the price mechanism
leads to a well-defined equilibrium. In the study of Pareto efficient alloca-
tions we found that nearly all Pareto efficient allocations can be obtained
through a suitable reallocation of endowments and a price mechanism. And
here, in the study of a general pure exchange economy, prices appear in a
third and different light: the only allocations that are in the core of a large
economy are market equilibrium allocations. The shrinking core theorem
shows that Walrasian equilibria are robust: even very weak equilibrium
concepts, like that of the core, tend to yield allocations that are close t o
Walrasian equilibria for large economies.
                                                   CONVEXITY AND SIZE    393



21.2 Convexity and size
Convexity of preference has come up in several general equilibrium models.
Usually, the assumption of strict convexity has been used to assure that
the demand function is well-defined-that there is only a single bundle de-
manded at each price-and that the demand function be continuous-that
small changes in prices give rise t o small changes in demand. The convex-
ity assumption appears to be necessary for the existence of a n equilibrium
allocation since it is easy to construct examples where nonconvexities cause
discontinuities of demand and thus nonexistence of equilibrium prices.
   Consider, for example, the Edgeworth box diagram in Figure 21.3. Here
agent A has nonconvex preferences while agent B has convex preferences.
At the price p*, there are two points that maximize utility; but supply is
not equal to demand at either point.


                                   CONSUMER 8




                                                                        Demand by
                                                                        consumer 1




CONSUMERA                                                                QUANTITY
                  x;       XA                            x;
                       A                                        B
      Nonexistence of an equilibrium with nonconvex prefer-                     Figure
      ences. Panel A depicts an Edgeworth box example in which                  21.3
      one agent has nonconvex preferences. Panel B shows the asso-
      ciated aggregate demand curve, which will be discontinuous.


  However, perhaps equilibrium is not so difficult to achieve as this exam-
ple suggests. Let us consider a specific example. Suppose that the total
supply of the good is just halfway between the two demands at p* as in
Figure 2 1 . 3 B . Now think what would happen if the economy would repli-
cate once so that there were two agents of type A and two agents of type
B. Then at the price p*, one type-A agent could demand x> and the other
type-A agent could demand xa. In that case, the total demand by the
agents would in fact be equal t o the total amount of the good supplied. A
Walrasian equilibrium exists for the replicated economy.
394 EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS (Ch. 21)


   It is not hard to see that a similar construction will work no matter where
the supply curve lies: if it were two-thirds of the way between xfi and xa,we
would just replicate three times, and so on. We can get aggregate demand
arbitrarily close to aggregate supply just by replicating the economy a
sufficient number of times.
   This argument suggests that in a large economy in which the scale of
nonconvexities is small relative to the size of the market, there will generally
be a price vector that results in demand being close to supply. For a large
enough economy small nonconvexities do not cause serious difficulties.
   This observation is closely related to the replication argument described
in our discussion of competitive firms behavior. Consider a classic model
of firms with fixed costs and U-shaped average cost functions. The s u p
ply functions of individual firms will typically be discontinuous, but these
discontinuities will be irrelevant if the scale of the market is sufficiently
large.


21.3 Uniqueness of equilibrium
We know from the section on existence of general equilibrium that under
appropriate conditions a price vector will exist that clears all markets; i.e.,
there exists a p* such that z(p*)_< 0. The question we ask in this section
is that of uniqueness: when is there only one price vector that clears all
markets?
   The free goods case is not of great interest here, so we will rule it out
by means of the desirability assumption: we will assume that the excess
demand for each good is strictly positive when its relative price is zero.
Economically this means that, when the price of a good goes to zero, ev-
eryone demands a lot of it, which seems reasonable enough. This has the
obvious consequence that at all equilibrium price vectors the price of each
good must be strictly positive.
   As before, we will want to assume z is continuous, but now we need
even more than that-we want to assume continuous differentiability. The
reasons for this are fairly clear; if indifference curves have kinks in them,
we can find whole ranges of prices that are market equilibria. Not only are
the equilibria not unique, they aren't even locally unique.
   Given these assumptions, we have a purely mathematical problem: given
a smooth mapping z from the price simplex to R k , when is there a unique
point that maps into zero? It is too much to hope that this will occur in
general, since one can construct easy counterexamples, even in the two-
dimensional case. Hence, we are interested in finding restrictions on the
excess demand functions that ensure uniqueness. We will then be inter-
ested in whether these restrictions are strong or weak, what their economic
meaning is, and so on.
   We will here consider two restrictions on z that ensure uniqueness. The
                                             UNIQUENESS OF EQUILIBRIUM     395


first case, that of gross substitutes, is interesting because it has clear eco-
nomic meaning and allows a simple, direct proof of uniqueness. The second
case, that of index analysis, is interesting because it is very general. In
fact it contains almost all other uniqueness results as special cases. Un-
fortunately, the proof utilizes a rather advanced theorem from differential
topology.


Gross substitutes

Roughly speaking, two goods are gross substitutes if an increase in the
price of one of the goods causes an increase in the demand for the other
good. In elementary courses, this is usually the definition of substitutes.
In more advanced courses, it is necessary to distinguish between the idea
of n e t substitutes- when the price of one good increases, the Hicksian
demand for the other good increases-and gross substitutes-which re-
places "Hicksian" with "Marshallian" in this definition.

Gross substitutes. Two goods, i and j , are gross substitutes at a price
vector p i f 82 .(PI > 0 for i # j .

  This definition says that two goods are gross substitutes if an increase
in price i brings about an increase in the excess demand for good j. If all
goods are gross substitutes, the Jacobian matrix of z, Dz(p), will have all
positive off-diagonal terms.

Gross substitutes implies unique equilibrium. If all goods are gross
substitutes at all prices, then if p* is an equilibrium price vector, it is the
unique equilibrium price vector.

Proof. Suppose p' is some other equilibrium price vector. Since p* >> 0
we can define m = max p:/pf # 0. By homogeneity and the fact that p*
is an equilibrium, we know that z(p*) = z(mp*) = 0. We know that for
some price, pk, we have mp; = pi by the definition of m. We now lower
each price mpf other than pk successively to pi. Since the price of each
good other than k goes down in the movement from mp* to p', we must
have the demand for good k going down. Thus zk(pl) < 0 which implies
p' cannot be an equilibrium. I


Index analysis

Consider an economy with only two goods. Choose the price of good 2
as the numeraire, and draw the excess demand curve for the good 1 as a
         396 EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS (Ch. 21)


         function of its own price. Walras' law implies that, when the excess demand
         for good 1 is zero, we have an equilibrium. The desirability assumption we
         have made implies that, when the relative price of good 1 is large, the
         excess demand for good 1 is negative; and when the relative price of good
         1 is small, the excess demand for good 1 is positive.
            Refer to Figure 21.4, where we have drawn some examples of what can
         happen. Note that (1) the equilibria are usually isolated; (2) and (3) the
         cases where they are not isolated are not "stable" with respect to minor
         perturbations; (4) there is usually an odd number of equilibria; (5) if the
         excess demand curve is downward sloping at all equilibria, there can be only
         one equilibrium, and if there is only one equilibrium, the excess demand
         curve must be downward sloping at the equilibrium.




Figure        Uniqueness and local uniqueness of equilibrium. These
21.4          panels depict some examples used in the discussion of uniqueness
              of equilibrium.


            In the above one-dimensional case note that if dz(p)/dp < 0 at all equi-
         libria, then there can be only one equilibrium. Index analysis is a way of
                                                  UNIQUENESS OF EQUILIBRIUM   397


generalizing this result to k dimensions so as to give us a simple necessary
and sufficient condition for uniqueness.
   Given an equilibrium p*, define the index of p* in the following way:
write down the negative of the Jacobian matrix of the excess supply func-
tion -Dz(p*), drop the last row and column, and take the determinant of
the resulting matrix. Assign the point p* an index +1, if the determinant
is positive, and assign p* an index -1 if the determinant is negative. (Re-
moving the last row and column is equivalent to choosing the last good to
be numeraire just as in our simple one-dimensional example.)
   We also need a boundary condition; there are several general possibilities,
but the simplest is to assume zi(p) > 0 when pi = 0. In this case, a
fundamental theorem of differential topology states that, if all equilibria
have positive index, there can be only one of them. This immediately gives
us a uniqueness theorem.
Uniqueness of equilibrium. Suppose z is a continuously diflerentiable
aggregate excess demand function on the price simplex with zi(p) > 0 when
pi equals zero. If the (k - 1) by (k - 1) m a t k (-Dz(p*)) has positive
detewninant at all equilibria, then there is only one equilibrium.
   This uniqueness theorem is a purely mathematical result. It has the
advantage that the theorem can be applied to a number of different equi-
librium problems. If an equilibrium existence theorem can be formulated as
a fixed point problem, then we can generally use an index theorem to find
conditions under which that equilibrium is unique. However, the theorem
has the disadvantage that it is hard to interpret what it means in economic
terms.
   In the case we are examining here, we are interested in the determinant
of the aggregate excess supply function. We can use Slutsky's equation to
write the derivative of the aggregate excess supply function as
                          n                   n                                \



        - D ~ ( P )= -   C
                         i=l
                             Dphi(p, ui) - C D r n x i ( ~~, i ) [ w-i xi].
                                           i=l
When will the matrix on the left-hand side have a positive determinant?
Let's look at the right-hand side of the expression. The first term on
the right-hand side works out nicely; the substitution matrix is a negative
semidefinite matrix, so the (negative) of the (k - 1) x (k - 1) principal
minor of that matrix will typically be a positive definite matrix. The sum
of positive definite matrices is positive definite, and will therefore have a
positive determinant.
   The second term is more problematic. This term is essentially the co-
variance of the excess supplies of the goods with the marginal propensity
to consume the goods. There is no reason to think that it would have
any particular structure in general. All we can say is that if these income
effects are small relative to the substitution effects, so that the first term
dominates, it is reasonable to expect that equilibrium will be unique.
398 EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS (Ch. 21)



21.4 General equilibrium dynamics
We have shown that under plausible assumptions on the behavior of eco-
nomic agents there will always exist a price vector that equates demand
and supply. But we have given no guarantee that the economy will actu-
ally operate at this "equilibrium" point. What forces exist that might tend
to move prices to a market-clearing price vector? In this section we will
examine some of the problems encountered in trying to model the price
adjustment mechanism in a competitive economy.
   The biggest problem is one that is the most fundamental, namely the
paradoxical relationship between the idea of competition and price adjust-
ment: if all economic agents take market prices as given and outside their
control, how can prices move? Who is left to adjust prices?
   This puzzle has led to the erection of an elaborate mythology which
postulates the existence of a "Walrasian auctioneer" whose sole function is
to search for the market clearing prices. According to this construction, a
competitive market functions as follows:
  At time zero the Walrasian auctioneer calls out some vector of prices. All
  agents determine their demands and supplies of current and futures goods
  at those prices. The auctioneer examines the vector of aggregate excess
  demands and adjusts prices according to some rule, presumably raising the
  price of goods for which there is excess demand and lowering the price
  of goods for which there is excess supply. The process continues until an
  equilibrium price vector is found. At this point, all trades are made including
  the exchanges of contracts for future trades. The economy then proceeds
  through time, each agent carrying out the agreed upon contracts.
  This is, of course, a very unrealistic model. However, the basic idea that
prices move in the direction of excess demand seems plausible. Under what
conditions will this sort of adjustment process lead one to an equilibrium?


21.5 Tatonnement processes
Let's consider an economy that takes place over time. Each day the market
opens and people present their demands and supplies to the market. At
an arbitrary price vector p , there will in general be excess demands and
supplies in some markets. We will assume that prices adjust according to
the following rule, the so-called law of supply and demand.
Price adjustment rule. pi = Gi(zi(p)) for i = 1 , . . . , k where Gi is
some smooth sign-preserving function of excess demand.
  It is convenient to make some sort of desirability assumption to rule out
the possibility of equilibria at a zero price, so we will generally assume that
zi(p) > 0 when pi = 0.
                                                      TATONNEMENT PROCESSES        399


  It is useful to draw some pictures of the dynamical system defined by
this price adjustment rule. Let's consider a special case where G i ( z i )equals
the identity function for each i = 1,.. . , k. Then, along with the boundary
assumption, we have a system in R k defined by:



From the usual considerations we know that this system obeys Walras' law,
p z ( p ) = 0. Geometrically, this means that z ( p ) will be orthogonal to the
price vector p.
   Walras' law implies a very convenient property. Let's look at how the
the Euclidean norm of the price vector changes over time:




by Walras' law. Hence, Walras' law requires that the sum-of-squares of the
prices remains constant as the prices adjust. This means that the paths of
prices are restricted on the surface of a k-dimensional sphere. Furthermore,
since z i ( p ) > 0 where pi = 0, we know that the paths of price movements
always point inwards near the points where pi = 0. In Figure 21.5 we have
some pictures for k = 2 and k = 3.
   The third picture is especially unpleasant. It depicts a situation where we
have a unique equilibrium, but it is completely unstable. The adjustment
process we have described will almost never converge to an equilibrium.
This seems like a perverse case, but it can easily happen.
   Debreu (1974) has shown essentially that any continuous function that
satisfies Walras' law is an excess demand function for some economy; thus
the utility maximization hypothesis places no restrictions on aggregate de-
mand behavior, and any dynamical system on the price sphere can arise
from our model of economic behavior. Clearly, to get global stability results
one has to assume special conditions on demand functions. The value of
the results will then depend on the economic naturalness of the conditions
assumed.
   We will sketch an argument of global stability for one such special as-
sumption under a special adjustment process, namely the assumption that
aggregate demand behavior satisfies the Weak Axiom of Revealed Prefer-
                                                                       >
ence described in Chapter 8, page 133. This says that if p x ( p ) px(p*) we
must have p * x ( p ) > p * x ( p * )for all p and p*. Since this condition holds
for all p and p*, it certainly must hold for equilibrium values of p*. Let us
derive the implications of this condition for the excess demand function.
  Subtracting pw and p*w from each of these inequalities yields the fol-
lowing implication:

  p x ( p ) - pw   > p x ( p * )- pw implies p * x ( p )- p*w > p * x ( p * )- p * ~ .
         400 EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS (Ch. 21)




                  P3

Figure        Examples of price dynamics. The first two examples show
21.5          a stable equilibrium; the third example has a unique unstable
              equilibrium.


         Using the definition of excess demand, we can write this expression as

                         pz(p) 2 pz(p*)implies P*Z(P)> P*z(P*).                 (21.1)

            Now observe that the condition on the left side of (21.1) must be sat-
         isfied by any equilibrium price vector p*. To see this simply observe that
         Walras' law implies that pz(p) s 0, and the definition of equilibrium im-
         plies pz(p*) = 0. It follows that the right-hand side must hold for any
         equilibrium p*. Hence, we must have p*z(p)> 0 for all p # p*.

         WARP implies stability.             Suppose the adjustment rule is given by
         pi = z,(p) for i = 1, . . . , k and the excess demand function obeys the Weak
         Axiom of Revealed Preference; i.e., if p* is an equilibrium of the economy,
         then p*z(p) > 0 for all p # p*. Then all paths of prices following the
         above rule converge to p*.
                                               NONTATONNEMENT PROCESSES          401


Proof. (Sketch) We will construct a Liaponov function for the economy.
(See Chapter 26, page 485.) Let V ( p )= c:=, [(pi- ~ , t ) ~ ] .
                                                             Then

                         k                        k
            dV(p) =
             dt
                       C 2(p, - p;)9i ( t ) = 2  C(p,
                                                   - p;)zi(p)
                    i= 1                        i=l




  This implies that V ( p )is monotonically declining along solution paths for
p # p*. According to Liaponov's theorem we need only to show bound-
edness of p to conclude that V ( p ) is a Liaponov function and that the
economy is globally stable. We omit this part of the proof. I




21.6 Nontatonnement processes

The tatonnement story makes sense in two sorts of situations: either no
trade occurs until equilibrium is reached, or no goods are storable so that
each period the consumers have the same endowments. If goods can be
accumulated, the endowments of consumers will change over time and this
in turn will affect demand behavior. Models that take account of this
change in endowments are known as n o n t a t o n n e m e n t m o d e l s .
   In such models, we must characterize the state of the economy at time
t by the current vector of prices p ( t ) and the current endowments ( o i ( t ) ) .
We normally assume that the prices adjust according to the sign of excess
demand, as before. But how should the endowments evolve?
   We consider two specifications. The first specification, the E d g e w o r t h
 process, says that the technology for trading among agents has the p r o p
erty that the utility of each agent must continually increase. This is based
on the view that agents will not voluntarily trade unless they are made bet-
ter off by doing so. This specification has the convenient property that it
quickly leads to a stability theorem; we simply define the Liaponov function
to be C y = l u i ( w i ( t ) ) .By assumption, the sum of the utilities must increase
over time, so a simple boundedness argument will give us a convergence
proof.
   The second specification is known as the H a h n process. For this process
we assume that the trading rule has the property that there is no good in
excess demand by some agent that is in excess supply by some other agent.
That is, at any point in time, if a good is in excess demand by a particular
agent, it is also in aggregate excess demand.
   This assumption has an important implication. We have assumed that
when a good is in excess demand its price will increase. This will make the
402 EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS (Ch. 21)


indirect utility of agents who demand that good lower. Agents who have
already committed themselves to supply the good at current prices are
not affected by this price change. Hence, aggregate indirect utility should
decline over time.
   To make this argument rigorous, we need to make one further assumption
about the change in endowments. The value of consumer i's endowment
at time t is mi(t)= C jk= , pj(t)wl)(t). Differentiating this with respect to t
gives



It is reasonable to suppose that the first term in this expression is zero.
This means that the change in the endowment at any instant, valued at
current prices, is zero. This is just saying that each agent will trade a
dollar's worth of goods for a dollar's worth of goods. The value of the
endowment will change over time due to changes in price, but not because
agents managed to make profitable trades at constant prices.
   Given this observation, it is easy to show that the sum of indirect utilities
decreases with time. The derivative of agent i's indirect utility function is




Using Roy's law and the fact that the value of the change in the endowment
at current prices must be zero, we have




By assumption if good j is in excess demand by agent i , d p j / d t > 0 and
vice versa. Since the marginal utility of income is positive, the sign of
the whole expression will be negative as long as aggregate demand is not
equal to aggregate supply. Hence the indirect utility of each agent i must
decrease when the the economy is not in equilibrium.

Notes

See Arrow & Hahn (1971) for a more elaborate discussion of these topics.
The importance of the topological index to uniqueness was first recognized
by Dierker (1972). The core convergence result was rigorously established
by Debreu & Scarf (1963).
                                                                 Exercises   403



Exercises

21.1. There are two agents with identical, strictly convex preferences and
equal endowments. Describe the core of this economy and illustrate it in
an Edgeworth box.

21.2. Consider a pure exchange economy in which all consumers have dif-
                                                                    +
ferentiable quasilinear utility functions of the form u(xl,. . . , 2,) 20. AS-
sume that u(xl,. . . , x,) is strictly concave. Show that equilibrium must
be unique.

21.3. Suppose that the Walrasian auctioneer follows the price adjustment
rule p = [ D ~ ( ~ ) ] - ' z ( p ) .Show that V(p) = -z(p)z(p) is a Liaponov
function for the dynamical system.
                     CHAPTER             22

                   WELFARE


In this chapter we examine a few concepts from welfare economics that
don't fit well in other parts of the book. The first concept is that of
the compensation criterion which is a criterion often used in benefit-cost
analysis. We then discuss a common trick used when computing welfare
effects of some change in output or price. Finally, we examine the problem
of optimal commodity taxation.


22.1 The compensation criterion

It is often desirable to know when a government project will improve social
welfare. For example, constructing a dam may have economic benefits such
as decreasing the price of electric power and water. However, against these
benefits we must weigh the costs of possible environmental damage and the
cost of constructing the dam. In general, the benefits and cost of a project
will affect different people in different ways-the increased water supply
from the dam may lower water fees in some areas and raise water fees in
other areas. How should these differential benefits and costs be compared?
                                               THE COMPENSATION CRITERION       405


   Previously we analyzed the problem of measuring the benefits or costs
accruing to one individual due to a change in the price or quantity con-
sumed of some good. In this section we try to extend that sort of analysis
to a community of individuals, using the concepts of the Pareto criterion
and the compensation criterion.
   Consider two allocations, x and x'. The allocation x' is said to Pareto
dominate x if everyone prefers x' to x.' If each individual prefers x' to
x, it seems noncontroversial to assert that x' is "better" than x and any
projects that move us from x to x' should be undertaken. This is the
Pareto criterion. However, projects that are unanimously preferred are
rare. In the typical case, some people prefer x' to x and some people may
prefer x to x'. What should the decision be then?
   The compensation criterion suggests the following test: x' is poten-
tially Pareto preferred to x if there is some way to reallocate x' so
that everyone prefers the reallocation to the original allocation x. Let us
state this definition a bit more formally: x' is potentially Pareto preferred
to x if there is some allocation x' with       Cy=l
                                                  xy =        C:=l
                                                              xi (i.e., x" is a
reallocation of x') such that xy ti xi for all agents i.
   Thus, the compensation criterion only requires that x' be a potential
Pareto improvement on x. Call a person a "winner" if he prefers x' to
x, and call him a "loser" if he prefers x to x'. Then x' is better than x
in the sense of the compensation test if the winners can compensate the
losers-that is, the winners can give away enough of their gains so as to
ensure that everyone is made better off.
   Now it seems reasonable that if the winners do in fact compensate the
losers, the proposed change will be acceptable to everyone. But it is not
clear why one should think x' is better than x merely because it is possible
for the winners to compensate the losers.
   The usual argument in defense of the compensation criterion is that the
question of whether the compensation is carried out is really a question
about income distribution, and the basic welfare theorems show that the
question of income distribution can be separated from the question of al-
locative efficiency. The compensation criterion is concerned solely with
allocative efficiency, and the question of proper income distribution can
best be handled by alternative means such as redistributive taxation. We
explore this point further in Chapter 22, page 410.
   Let us restate this discussion in graphical terms. Suppose that there are
only two individuals, and they are considering two allocations x and x'.
We associate with each allocation its utility possibility set
                                  : Y1 + Y2 = X I + x2)
                  u = {ul(~l),uz(y2)
                 U' = { ~ 1 ( ~ 1 ) , ~ 2 ( ~: 2Y1) + Y2 = x; + x:).

  We use strict preference here for convenience; the ideas can easily be extended to
  weak preference.
         406 WELFARE (Ch. 22)


         The upper right-hand boundaries of these sets are called the utility pos-
         sibility frontiers. The utility possibility frontier gives the utility distri-
         butions associated with all of the Pareto efficient reallocations of x and x'.
         Some examples of utility possibilities sets are depicted in Figure 22.1.
            In Figure 22.1A, the allocation x' is Pareto preferred to x since ul(xi) >
         ul(xl)and u2(x;)> u2(x2).In Figure 22.1B, x' is potentially Pareto pre-
         ferred to x: there is some reallocation of x' that is Pareto preferred to X,
         even though x' itself is not Pareto preferred. Thus, x' satisfies the compen-
         sation criterion in the sense that the winners could compensate the losers
         in the move from x to x'. In Figure 22.1C, x' and x are not comparable-
         neither the compensation test nor the Pareto test says anything about
         their relative desirability. In Figure 22.10, we have the most paradoxical
         situation: here x' is potentially Pareto preferred to x, since x" is Pareto
         preferable to x ; but then x is also potentially Pareto preferred to X' since
         xu' is Pareto preferred to x'!




Figure         Compensation test. In panel A, x' is Pareto preferred to X.
22.1           In panel B, x' is preferred to x in the sense of the compensation
               test. In panel C, x and x' are not comparable. In panel D, x is
               preferred to x' and x' is preferred to x.
                                              THE COMPENSATION CRITERION   407


   Cases C and D illustrate the main defects of the compensation criterion:
it gives no guidance in making comparisons between Pareto efficient allo-
cations, and it can result in inconsistent comparisons. Nevertheless, the
compensation test is commonly used in applied welfare economics.
   The compensation test, as we have described it, requires that we consider
the utility impact of the project on all affected consumers. On the face of
it, this seems t o require a detailed survey of the population. However, we
show below that this may not be necessary for certain cases.
   If the projects under consideration are public goods, there is not much
hope to avoid explicit questioning of the community in order to make so-
cial decisions. We examine the problems with this type of questioning in
chapter 23. If the projects concern private goods, we have a much nicer
situation since the current prices of the private goods reflect, in some sense,
their marginal value t o the individual agents.
   Suppose we are currently at a market equilibrium (x,p)and we are
contemplating moving to an allocation x'. Then

National income test.         If x' is potentially Pareto preferred to x, we
must have                      n          n
                              1px: > 1PXi
That is, national income measured i n current prices is larger at x' than at
X.


Proof. If x' is preferred to x in the sense of the compensation criterion,
then there is some allocation x" such that    ELl XI'
                                                   = Ey=l xi and x; +i xi
for all i. Since x is a market equilibrium, this means that pxy > pxi for
all i. Summing, we have CZl px! > EZl pxi. But




and this establishes the result. I

   This result is useful since it gives us a one-way test of proposed projects:
if national income measured a t current prices declines, then the project
cannot possibly be potentially Pareto preferred to the current allocation.
   Figure 22.2 makes the proposition geometrically clear. The axes of the
graph measure the aggregate amount of the two goods available. The
current allocation is represented by some aggregate bundle X = (X 1 , X 2 )
where X1 = ELl x: and X 2 is defined similarly. (Remember consumers
are represented by subscripts and goods by superscripts.)
   Let us say that an aggregate bundle X' is potentially Pareto preferred
to an allocation x if X' can be distributed among the agents to construct
         408 WELFARE (Ch. 22)




                                                       GOOD 1



Figure        National income test. If national income decreases, the
22.2          change cannot be potentially Pareto preferred. If national in-
              come increases, the change may or may not be potentially Pareto
              preferred. However, if a small change increases national income
              then it is likely potentially Pareto preferred.

         an allocation x' that is Pareto preferred t o x . In other words, the set of
         potentially Pareto preferred aggregate bundles is given by


                                P=
                                     in
                                     i=l
                                           x: : x: >.i xi for all i


            Figure 22.2 illustrates a typical case. The set P is nice and convex
         and the aggregate bundle X is on its boundary. The competitive prices
         separate X from P. From this picture it is easy to see the content of
         the proposition given above: if x' is preferred to x in the sense of the
         compensation criterion, then X' must be in P and therefore pX' > p X .
            We can also see that the converse is not true. The bundle XI' has pX'' >
         p X , but it is not potentially Pareto preferrable to x . However, the diagram
         does present an interesting conjecture: if pX" > p X and XI1 is close
         enough to X , then XI' must be potentially Pareto preferable to x . More
         precisely, look at the dotted line connecting XI' and X . All points on this
         line have higher value than X , but not all points on this line are above the
         indifference curve through X . However, points on this line that are close
         enough to X are above the indifference curve. Let's try to formulate this
         idea algebraically.
            The argument rests on the fact that to the first order, changes in utility
         for an individual are proportional to changes in income. This follows from
         a simple Taylor series expansion:
                                                    WELFARE FUNCTIONS    409


According t o this expression, small changes in the bundle xi are preferred
or not preferred as the change in the value of the bundle is positive or
negative.
  We use this idea t o show that if p Cix: > p x , xi and xi is close
to xi, then it is possible to find a redistribution of xl-call it x"-such
that everyone prefers x rr to x. To show this, simply let X = x i x i and
XI =  xi  xi, and define x" by




Here each agent i is getting l/nthof the aggregate gain in the movement
from x to x'. According to the above Taylor series expansion,




Thus, if the right-hand side is positive---national income a t the original
prices increases-then it must be possible to increase every agent's utility.
Of course, this only holds if the change is small enough for the Taylor
approximation t o be valid. The national income test is commonly used t o
value the impact of marginal policy changes on consumer welfare.


22.2 Welfare functions

As we mentioned earlier in this chapter, the compensation methodology
suffers from the defect that it ignores distributional considerations. An
allocation that is potentially Pareto preferred to the current allocation has
potentially higher welfare. But one might well argue that actual welfare is
what is relevant.
   If one is willing to postulate some welfare function, one can incorporate
distributional considerations into a cost-benefit analysis. Let us suppose
that we have a linear-in-utility welfare function




  As we saw in Chapter 17, page 331, the parameters (ai) are related to
the "welfare weights" of individual economic agents. These weights can be
thought of as the value judgments of the "social planner." Let us suppose
we are a t a market equilibrium ( x , p ) and are considering moving t o an
410 WELFARE (Ch. 22)


allocation x'. Will this movement increase welfare? If x' is close t o x, we
can apply a Taylor series expansion to get




Since (x, p ) is a market equilibrium, we can rewrite this as
                                                                n

  (    1(    ) .., n   )   ) -(   (   I   ) . . , Un(Xn))   " C aiXip(x: - xi).
                                                              i= 1

We see that the welfare test reduces to examining a weighted change of
expenditures. The weights are related to the value judgments which were
originally incorporated into the welfare function.
   As a special case, suppose that the original allocation x is a welfare
optimum. Then the results of Chapter 17, page 331, tell us that Xi = l / a i .
In this case we find




The distribution terms drop out-since distribution is already optimal-
and we are left with a simple criterion: a small project increases welfare
if national income (at the original prices) increases. This is exactly the
criterion relevant to the compensation test.
   This means that if the social planner consistently follows a policy of
maximizing welfare both with respect to lump sum income distribution
and with respect to other policy choices that affect allocations, then the
policy choices that affect the allocations can be valued independently of
the effect on the income distribution.


22.3 Optimal taxation

We saw in Chapter 8, page 118, that a lump-sum income tax is always
preferable to an excise tax. However, in many cases lump-sum taxes are
not feasible. What do optimal taxes look like if we are unable to use lump
sum taxes?
   We examine this question in a one-consumer economy. Let u(x) be the
consumer's direct utility function and v(p, m) be his indirect utility func-
tion. We interpret p as the producer prices. If t is the vector of taxes,
then the price vector faced by the consumer is p            +
                                                        t . This yields the
                            +
consumer a utility of v ( p t , m ) and yields the government a revenue of
R(t) = c:=, + t,zi(p t , m).
                                                              OPTIMAL TAXATION   411


  The optimal taxation problem is to maximize the consumer's utility with
respect to the tax rates, subject to the constraint that the tax system raises
some given amount of revenue, R:

                          max v ( p + t , m )
                         tl,...,tk
                                      k
                     such that             tixi(p   + t, m) = R.
                                     i=l

The Lagrangian for this problem is




Differentiating with respect to ti, we have




Applying Roy's law, we can write




Solving for xi we have




  Now use the Slutsky equation on the right-hand side of this equation to
get



After some manipulation, this expression can be written as




where 8 is a function of p, A, and Cjtjdxj/dm.
412 WELFARE (Ch. 22)


  Applying the symmetry of the Slutsky matrix, we can write




Putting this expression into elasticity form yields




This equation says that the taxes must be chosen so that the weighted sum
of the Hicksian cross-price elasticities is the same for all goods.
   In the extreme case, where ~ i j= 0 for i # j, this condition becomes

                                  ti - -
                                  -     e
                                  pi   fii



so that the tax/price ratio for good i is proportional to the inverse of
the elasticity of demand. This is known as the inverse elasticity rule.
It makes good sense: you should tax goods heavily that are relatively
inelastically demanded, and tax goods lightly that are relatively elastically
demanded. Doing this distorts the consumer's decisions the least.
   Another simplification arises when the tax rates ti are small. In this case




Inserting this into equation (22.1) gives us




This equation says that the optimal set of small taxes reduces all compen-
sated demands by the same proportion.

Notes

The material in this chapter is pretty standard; consult any text on benefit-
cost analysis for elaboration. For a survey of optimal taxation theory see
Mirrlees (1982) or Atkinson & Stiglitz (1980).
                                                                Exercises   413



Exercises

22.1. In the formula for the optimal tax derived in the text, equation (22.1),
show that 19is nonnegative if the required amount of revenue is positive.

22.2. A public utility produces outputs X I , . . . , xk. These goods are con-
sumed by a representative consumer with utility function ul (XI) . . .+ +
       +
uk(xk) y, where y is a numeraire good. The utility produces good i at
marginal cost c, but has fixed costs F. Derive a formula for the optimal
pricing rule that relates (pi- ci)to the elasticity of demand for good i.
                     CHAPTER            23
                     PUBLIC
                     GOODS

Up until now our discussion of resource allocation has been concerned solely
with private goods, that is, goods whose consumption only affects a single
economic agent. Consider, for example, bread. You and I can consume
different amounts of bread, and, if I consume a particular loaf of bread,
you are excluded from consuming the same loaf of bread.
   We say that a good is excludable if people can be excluded from con-
suming it. We say that a good is nonrival if one person's consumption
does not reduce the amount available to other consumers. Rival goods are
goods where one person's consumption does reduce the amount available to
others. Rival goods are sometimes called diminishable. Ordinary private
goods are both excludable and rival.
   Certain goods do not have these properties. A nice example is street
lights. The amount of street lights in a given area is fixed-you and I both
have the same potential consumption, and the amount that I "consume"
doesn't affect the amount available for you to consume. Hence, streetlights
are nonrival. Furthermore, my consumption of street lights does not ex-
clude your consumption. Goods that are not excludable and are nonrival
are called public goods; other examples are police and fire protection,
highways, national defense, lighthouses, television and radio broadcasts,
clean air, and so on.
                         EFFICIENT PROVISION OF A DISCRETE PUBLIC GOOD   415


   There are also many in-between cases. Consider for example, the case of
a coded TV broadcast. This is nonrival-since one person's consumption
doesn't reduce another person's-but it is excludable, since only people
who have access to a decoder can watch the broadcast. Goods of this sort
are sometimes called club goods.
   Another class of examples are goods that are not excludable, but are
rival. A crowded street is a good example: anyone can use the street, but
one person's use reduces the amount of space available to someone else.
   Finally, we have certain goods that are inherently private goods, but are
treated as though they are public goods. Education, for example, is essen-
tially a private good-it is excludable, and, to some extent, diminishable.
However, most countries have made a political decision to provide educa-
tion publicly. Often there has been a political decision to provide the same
level of educational expenditure to all citizens. This constraint requires us
to treat education as if it were a public good.
   Resource allocation problems involving public goods turn out to be quite
different from resource allocation problems involving private goods. We've
seen earlier that competitive markets are an effective social institution for
allocating private goods in an efficient manner. However, it turns out that
private markets are often not a very good mechanism for allocating public
goods. Generally, other social institutions, such as voting, must be used.


23.1 Efficient provision of a discrete public good

We begin by studying a simple example with two agents and two goods.
One good, x,, is a private good and can be thought of as money to be spent
on private consumption. The other good, G, is a public good, which can
be money to spend on some public good such as streetlights. The agents
initially have some endowment of the private good, w,, and determine how
much to contribute to the public good. If individual i decides to contribute
g,, he will have x, = w, -g, of private consumption. We assume that utility
is strictly increasing in consumption of both the public and the private good
and write u,(G, x,) for agent i's utility function.
   Initially, we consider the case where the public good is only available in
a discrete amount; either it is provided in that amount or it is not provided
at all. Assume that it costs c to provide one unit of the public good so that
the technology is given by




Later on we consider more general technologies.
  We first ask when it is Pareto efficient to provide the public good. Pro-
viding the public good will Pareto dominate not providing it if there is
416 PUBLIC GOODS (Ch. 23)


some pattern of contributions (gl, g2) such that gl   + g2 2 c and



Let ri be the maximum amount of the private good that agent i would
be willing to give up to get one unit of the public good. We call this the
maximum willingness-to-pay, or the reservation price of consumer i. (See
Chapter 9, page 153.)
  By definition ri must satisfy the equation




Applying this definition to equation (23.1), we have




for i = 1,2. Since utility is strictly increasing in private consumption,




for i = 1,2. Adding these inequalities, we see that




   Hence, if it is Pareto improving to provide the public good, we must
have r l +r2 > c. That is, the sum of the willingnesses-to-pay for the public
good must exceed the cost of providing it. Note the difference from the
efficiency conditions for providing a private good. In the case of a private
good, if individual i is willing to pay the cost of producing a private good,
it is efficient to provide it. Here we only need the weaker condition that
sum of the willingnesses-to-pay exceeds the cost of provision.
   It is not difficult to show the converse proposition. Suppose that we have
TI+    7-2 > C. Then choose gi slightly less than ri, so that the inequalities
gl+g2>cand
                          ui(l,wi -gi) > ui(0,wi)

are satisfied for i = 1,2. This shows when rl + r z > c it is both feasible and
Pareto improving to provide the public good. We summarize the discussion
in the following statement: it is a Pareto improvement to provide a discrete
public good if and only if the sum of the willingnesses-to-pay exceeds the
cost of provision.
                                   VOTING FOR A DISCRETE PUBLIC GOOD    417


           Private provision of a discrete public good.
                                                                               Table
                                                                               23.1
                                               Consumer 2
                                                    Don't buy
                                          -50,-50    -50,100
             Consumer 1




23.2 Private provision of a discrete public good

How effective is a private market at providing public goods? Suppose that
r, = 100 for i = 1,2 and c = 150 so that the sum of the willingnesses-to-pay
exceed the cost of provision. Each agent decides independently whether or
not t o buy the public good. However, since the public good is a public
good, neither agent can exclude the other from consuming it.
   We can represent the strategies and payoffs in a simple game matrix,
depicted in Table 23.2.
   If consumer 1 buys the good, he gets $100 worth of benefits, but has t o
pay $150 for these benefits. If consumer 1 buys, but consumer 2 refrains
from buying, consumer 2 gets $100 worth of benefits for free. In this case
we say that consumer 2 is free riding on consumer 1.
   Note that this game has a structure similar to the Prisoner's Dilemma
described in Chapter 15, page 261. The dominant strategy equilibrium in
this game is (don't buy, don't buy). Neither consumer wants to buy the
good because each prefers to free-ride on the other consumer. But the
net result is that the good isn't provided a t all, even though it would be
efficient to do so.
   This shows that we cannot expect that purely independent decisions will
necessarily result in an efficient amount of the public good being provided.
In general it will be necessary to use more complicated mechanisms.


23.3 Voting for a discrete public good

The amount of a public good is often determined by voting. Will this
generally result in an efficient provision? Suppose that we have three con-
sumers who decide to vote on whether or not t o provide a public good
which costs $99 to provide. If a majority votes in favor of provision, they
will split the cost equally and each pay $33. The reservation prices of the
three consumers are rl = 90, rz = 30, and rs = 30.
  Clearly, the sum of the reservation prices exceeds the cost of provision.
However, in this case only consumer 1 will vote in favor of providing the
418 PUBLIC GOODS (Ch. 23)


public good, since only consumer 1 receives a positive net benefit if the
good is provided. The problem with majority voting is that it only mea-
sures the ordinal preferences for the public good, whereas the efficiency
condition requires a comparison of willingness-to-pay. Consumer 1 would
be willing to compensate the other consumers to vote in favor of the public
good, but this possibility may not be available.
   Another sort of voting involves individuals stating their willingness-to-
pay for the public good, with the rule that the public good will be pro-
vided if the sum of the stated willingnesses-to-pay exceeds the cost of the
public good. If the cost shares are fked, then there is typically no equi-
librium to this game. Consider the example of the three voters given
above. In this case, voter 1 is made better off if the good is provided,
so he may as well announce an arbitrarily large positive number. Simi-
larly agents 2 and 3 may as well announce arbitrarily large negative num-
bers.
   Another sort of voting for a good involves each person announcing how
much they are willing to pay for the public good. If the sum of the stated
prices is a t least as large as the cost of the public good, the good will be
provided and each person must pay the amount he announced. In this
case if provision of the public good is Pareto efficient, then this is an equi-
librium of the game. Any set of announcements such that each agent's
announcement is no larger than his reservation price and that sum up t o
the cost of the public good is an equilibrium. However, there are many
other inefficient equilibria of the game as well. For example, all agents
announcing zero willingness-tepay for the public good will typically be an
equilibrium.



23.4 Efficient provision of a continuous public good

Let us now suppose that the public good can be provided in any continuous
                                                                       +
amount; we continue to consider only 2 agents for simplicity. If gl g2 is
contributed to the public good, then the amount of the public good is
                    +
given by G = f (gl g2), and the utility of agent i is given by Ui(f (gl     +
g2), wi - g,). We may as well incorporate the production function into the
utility function and just write ui(g1 +g2, W, -gi), where ui(G, xi) is defined
to be Ui(f (G), xi). Incorporating the technology into the utility function
doesn't result in loss of generality since ultimately utility depends on the
total contributions to the public good.
  We know that the first-order conditions for efficiency can be found by
maximizing a weighted sum of utilities:
                       EFFICIENT PROVISION OF A CONTINUOUS PUBLIC GOOD            419


The first-order conditions for gl and g2 can be written as




It follows that aldul/dxl = a2du2/dx2. Dividing the left-hand sides of
(23.3) by the right-hand sides, and using this equality, we have




The condition for efficiency in the case of continuous provision of the public
good is that the sum of the marginal willingnesses-to-pay equals the mar-
ginal cost of provision, In this case the marginal cost is l since the public
good is simply the sum of the contributions.
   As usual, there will typically be a whole range of allocations (G, XI,x2)
where this efficiency condition is satisfied. Since in general the marginal
willingness-to-pay for a public good depends on the amount of private con-
sumption, the efficient level of G will typically depend on XI and x2.
   However, under one special case, the case of quasilinear utility, the ef-
ficient amount of the public good will be independent of the level of pri-
vate consumption. To see this, suppose that the utility functions have the
             +
form ui(G) xi. Then the efficiency condition (23.4) can be written as
       +
u',(G) u;(G) = 1, which will normally determine a unique level of the
public good.'


EXAMPLE: Solving for the efficient provision of a public good

Suppose that the utility functions have the Cobb-Douglas form u,(G, x,) =
       +
ai lnG In xi. In this case the M R S functions are given by aixi/G, so the
efficiency condition is

                                  G




  This argument assumes that it is efficient to supply a positive amount of the public
  good. If income is very low, this may not be the case.
420 PUBLIC GOODS (Ch. 23)


If the total amount of the private good available initially is w, then we also
have the condition
                              xl+x2+G=w.                                (23.6)
Equations (23.5) and (23.6) describe the set of Pareto efficient allocations.
  Now consider quasilinear utility functions where ui(G, xi)= bi In G +xi.
The first-order efficiency condition is




Again the allocation must be feasible so the set of Pareto efficient alloca-
tions is described by (23.6) and (23.7). Note that in the case of quasilinear
utility there is a unique efficient amount of the public good, whereas in the
general case there are many different efficient levels.


23.5 Private provision of a continuous public good

Suppose that each agent independently decides how much he wants to
contribute to the public good. If agent 1 thinks that agent 2 will contribute
g2, say, then agent 1's utility maximization problem is



                       such that gl 2 0.

The constraint that gl 2 0 is a natural restriction in this case; it says
that agent 1 can voluntarily increase the amount of the public good, but
he cannot unilaterally decrease it. As we will see below, this inequality
constraint turns out to be important.
  The Kuhn-Tucker first-order condition for this problem is




where equality holds if gl > 0. We can also write this condition as




If agent i contributes a positive amount, his marginal rate of substitution
between the public and private good must equal his marginal cost, 1. If his
                          PRIVATE PROVISION OF A CONTINUOUS PUBLIC G O O D       421


marginal rate of substitution is less than his cost, then he will not want to
contribute.
  This condition is illustrated in Figure 23.1. Here the "endowment" of
agent 1 is the point (wl, g2), since the amount of private consumption
he receives if he contributes nothing is wl and the amount of the public
consumption he receives is g2. The "budget" line is the line with slope of
-1 that passes through this point. The feasible points on the budget line
are those where gl = wl - x1 2 0. We have depicted two cases: in one
case, agent 1 wants to contribute a positive amount, and in the other case,
agent 1 wants to free ride.


                                                PUBLIC
                                                GOOD




            x,       w,   PRIVATE GOOD                   w,       PRIVATE GOOD

                 A                                            B

     Private provision of a public good. In panel A, agent 1                           Figure
     is contributing a positive amount. In panel B, agent 1 finds it                   23.1
     optimal to free ride on agent 2's contribution.


   A Nash equilibrium to this game is a set of contributions (g:, g;) such
that each agent is contributing an optimal amount, given the contribution
of the other agent. Hence equation (23.8) must be satisfied simultane-
ously for both agents. We can write the conditions characterizing a Nash
eauilibrium as




                                         iJx2
If a positive amount of G is provided, then at least one of these inequali-
ties must be an equality. We could continue the analysis and attempt to
422 PUBLIC GOODS (Ch. 23)


find conditions under which only one of the agents contributes, when both
contribute, etc.
   However, there is another somewhat more useful way to describe Nash
equilibrium in this case. To do this, we need to solve for the reaction
function of agent i. This gives the amount that agent i wants to contribute
as a function of the other agent's contribution.
   We can write agent 1's maximization problem as



                         such that gl + x1 = w,
                                     91 L 0.
Using the fact that G = gl   + g2, we can rewrite this problem as
                              max ul (G, 21)
                              G,xi
                       such that G   + XI = wl + g2                  (23.11)


Look carefully at the second formulation. It says that agent 1 is effectively
choosing the total amount of the public good subject to his budget con-
straint, and the constraint that the amount he chooses must be at least as
large as the amount provided by the other person. The budget constraint
says that the total value of his consumption must equal the value of his
                  +
"endowment," wl g2.
   Problem (23.11) is just like an ordinary consumer maximization problem
except for the inequality constraint. Let fl(w) be agent 1's demand for the
public good as a function of his wealth, ignoring the inequality constraint.
Then the amount of the public good that solves (23.10) is given by



Subtracting g2 from both sides of this equation, we have



This is the reaction function for agent 1; it gives his optimal contribution
as a function of the other agent's contribution. A Nash equilibrium is a set
of contributions (gr, g;), such that




This formulation is often more useful than the formulation in (23.9) since
we have a better idea of what the demand functions fi and f2 might look
like. We pursue this point in an example below.
                      PRIVATE PROVISION OF A CONTINUOUS PUBLIC GOOD    423


  It is useful to examine the form the equilibrium conditions take when
utility is quasilinear. In this case we can write (23.9) as




Note that in general only one of these two constraints can be binding.
Suppose that agent 1 places a higher marginal value on the public good
than agent 2 so that u',(G) > u',(G) for all G, then only agent 1 will ever
contributeagent 2 will always free ride. Both agents will contribute only


                                                               -
when they have the same tastes (at the margin) for the public good.
  Alternatively, we note that when utility is quasilinear the demand for
the public good will be independent of income, so that fi(w) g,. Then
(23.12) takes the form




It follows from these equations that if 3, > g2, then g; = g1 and gz = 0.


EXAMPLE: Solving for Nash equilibrium provision

Consider our previous example with Cobb-Douglas utility functions. Ap-
plying the standard formula for Cobb-Douglas demand functions, we have




It follows that a solution to (23.12) must satisfy




  For the quasilinear example, we have the first-order conditions




Hence, G* = max{bl, b2). If bl > b2, agent 1 does all the contributing and
agent 2 free rides.
424 PUBLIC GOODS (Ch. 23)



23.6 Voting

Suppose that a group of agents is considering voting on the amount of a
public good. If the current level of the public good is G, then they take
a vote to decide whether to increase or decrease the amount of the public
good. If a majority votes in favor of increasing or decreasing the amount
of the good, this is done. A voting equilibrium is an amount such that
there is no majority that prefers either more or less of the public good.
   Without further restrictions, it is possible that no equilibrium exists in
this model. For example, suppose that there are three agents, A, B, and C
and three levels of provision of the public good, 1, 2, or 3 units. A prefers
1 to 2 and 2 to 3; B prefers 2 to 3 and 3 to 1; C prefers 3 to 1 and 1 to 2.
In this case there is a majority that prefers 1 to 2, a majority that prefers
2 to 3, and a majority that prefers 3 to 1. Hence, no matter what amount
of the public good is provided there is a majority that wants to change it.
This is an example of the well-known paradox of voting.
   However, if we are willing to add a little more structure we can eliminate
the paradox. Suppose that the agents all agree that if a majority votes
in favor of an increase in the public good, agent i will pay a fraction si
of the additional cost, and assume that all agents have quasilinear utility
functions. If G units of the public good are provided, agent i receives utility
ui(G) - siG. Hence, he will vote in favor of increasing the amount of the
public good if u:(G) > si.
   We say that agent i has single-peaked preferences if ui(G) - siG has
a unique maximum. Assuming this condition is satisfied, let Gi be the
point where agent 2's utility is maximized. Then I claim that the unique
voting equilibrium is given by the median value of the Gi's. For simplicity,
suppose that each agent has a different value of Gi and that there are an
                                      +
odd number of voters. If there are n 1 voters, then the median voter is
that one such that n/2 prefer more of the public good and n/2 prefer less.
If agent m is the median voter, the voting equilibrium level of the public
good, G,, is given by
                               uA(G,) = s,.

Such an equilibrium is called a Bowen equilibrium. It is clear that this is
an equilibrium since there is no majority that wants to decrease or increase
the amount of the public good. It is also not hard to show that it is unique.
  One question of interest is how it compares to the efficient level of the
public good. Recdl that this is the level of the public good that satisfies
                                                   LINDAHL ALLOCATIONS    425


We can also write this as




The left-hand side of this equation is the derivative of the "average" utility
function. The right-hand side is the average cost share. Hence, the efficient
level of the public good is determined by the condition that the average
willingness-to-pay must equal the average cost. This should be compared
to the voting equilibrium condition in which the median willingness-to-
pay is what determines the equilibrium amount of the public good. If
the median consumer wants the same amount of the public good as the
average consumer, the amount of the public good provided by voting will
be efficient. However, in general, either too much or too little of the public
good could be provided by voting depending on whether the median voter
wants more or less of the public good than the average voter.


EXAMPLE: Quasilinear utility and voting

Suppose that utility takes the form bi In G+xi and each person is obligated
to pay an equal share lln of the public good. The efficient amount of the
public good is given by G, =     Ci bi. The voting equilibrium amount is
the amount that is optimal for the median voter. Letting b, be the taste
parameter for this voter, we have



or G, = nb,.   Hence
                                          1
                  G , > G, if and only if - x b i > b,.
                                --             i

That is, the efficient amount of the public good exceeds the amount pro-
vided by majority voting if the average consumer values the public good
more highly than the median consumer.


23.7 Lindahl allocations
Suppose that we try to support an efficient allocation of the public good
by using a price system. We offer each consumer i the right to "buy" as
much as he wants of the public good at a price p,. Consumer i thus solves
the maximization problem


                         such that xi   + piG = wi-
426 PUBLIC GOODS (Ch. 23)


The first-order condition for this problem is




The optimal amount of G as a function of pi and wi is the consumer's
demand function for the public good, which we write as Gi(pi,wi).
   Is there a set of prices such that consumers will naturally choose an
efficient amount of the public good? Under the standard convexity condi-
tions, the answer is "yes." We know from our analysis of efficiency that an
efficient amount of the public good must satisfy




Hence choosing

                             P; =   w
should do the trick. These prices-the prices that support an efficient
allocation of the public good-are known as Lindahl prices.
   We can also interpret these prices as tax rates. If G units of the public
good are provided, then agent i must pay a tax of piG. For this reason,
one sometimes sees the Lindahl prices referred to as Lindahl taxes.


23.8 Demand revealing mechanisms
We have seen earlier in this chapter public goods may present problems for
a decentralized resource allocation mechanism. Private provision of public
goods generally results in less than an efficient amount of the public good.
Voting may result in too much or too little of the public good. Are there
any mechanisms that result in the "right" amount of the public good being
supplied?
   In order to examine this question, let us return to the model of the
discrete public good. Suppose that G is either 0 or 1. Let ri be agent i's
reservation price and si be agent i's cost share of the public good. Since
the public good costs c to provide, sic is the total amount of money that
agent i must pay if the good is provided. Let vi = ri - sic be agent i's
net value for the public good. According to our previous discussion, it is
efficient to provide the public good if Civi = C i ( r i- sic) > 0.
   One mechanism that we might use is simply to ask each agent to report
his or her net value and provide the public good if the sum of these reported
                                        DEMAND REVEALING MECHANISMS      427


values is nonnegative. The trouble with such a scheme is that it does
not provide good incentives for the individual agents to reveal their true
willingness to pay. For example, if agent 1's net value exceeds zero by any
amount, he might as well report an arbitrarily large amount. Since his
report doesn't affect how much he has to pay, but it does affect whether or
not the public good is provided, he may as well report as large a value as
possible.
  How can we induce each agent to trmthfully reveal his true value of the
public good? Here is a scheme that works:

The Groves-Clarke mechanism

(1) Each agent reports a "bid" for the public good, bi. This may or may
not be his true value.

(2) The public good is provided if C,bi 2 0, and it is not provided if
Cibi < 0.
(3) Each agent i receives a sidepayment equal to the sum of the other bids,
CjZibj, if the public good is provided. (If this sum is positive, agent i
receives it; if it is negative, agent i must pay this amount.)

   Let us show that it is optimal for each agent to report his true value.
There are n agents, each with a true value of vi and a bid value of bi. We
want to show that it is optimal for each agent to report bi = vi regardless
of what the other agents report. That is, we want to show that truthtelling
is a dominant strategy.
   Agent i's payoff takes the form

                            vi   + CjZibj if bi + CjZibj 2 0
            payoff to i =
                                           if b*   + Cjpibj < 0.
                 +
Suppose that vi CjZi      bj > 0. Then agent i can ensure that the public
good is provided by reporting bi = vi. Suppose, on the other hand, that
vi+ xjZi    bj < 0. Then agent i can ensure that the public good is not
provided by reporting bi = vi. Either way, it is optimal for agent i to
tell the truth. There is never an incentive to misrepresent preferences,
regardless of what the other agents do. In effect, the information-gathering
mechanism has been modified so that each agent faces the social decision
problem rather than the individual decision problem, and thus each agent
has an incentive to reveal his own preferences correctly.
   Unfortunately, the preference revelation scheme just described has a ma-
jor fault. The total sidepayments may potentially be very large: they are
equal to the amount that everyone else bids. It may be very costly to
induce the agents to tell the truth!
428 PUBLIC GOODS (Ch. 23)


   Ideally, we would like to have a mechanism where the sidepayments sum
up t o zero. However, it turns out that this is not possible in general.
However, it is possible to design a mechanism where the sidepayments are
always nonpositive. Thus the agents may be required to pay a "tax," but
they will never receive payments. Because of these "wasted" tax payments,
the allocation of public and private goods will not be Pareto efficient. How-
ever, the public good will be provided if and only if it is efficient to do so.
   Let us describe how this can be accomplished. The basic insight is the
following: we can require each agent i to make an additional payment
that depends only on what the other agents do without affecting any of i's
incentives.
   Let b-, be the vector of bids, omitting the bid of agent i, and let hi(b-i)
be the extra payment made by agent i. The payoff t o agent i now takes
the form




   It is clear that such mechanisms give truthful revelation for exactly the
reasons mentioned above. If the hi functions are cleverly chosen, the size
of the sidepayments can be significantly reduced. One nice choice for the
h, function is as follows:




Such a choice gives rise t o the pivotal mechanism, also known as the
Clarke tax. The payoff to agent i is of the form:

                                   ifCibi>Oandxjfibj20
   payoff to i =      + Cjfibj          Xi            n d CCjZi
                                   i f C i bbii <2O0aand
                                   if                       j Z i bbjj L<O0   (23.14)
                                   if   xibi < O and CjZibj < 0.
    Note that agent i never receives a positive sidepayment; he may be taxed,
but he is never subsidized. Adding in the sidepayment has the effect of
taxing agent i only if he changes the social decision. Look, for example,
a t rows two and three of expression (23.14). Agent i has to pay a tax only
when he changes the sum of the bids from positive t o negative, or vice
versa. The amount of the tax that i must pay is the amount by which
agent i's bid damages the other agents (according t o their stated bids).
The price that agent i must pay t o change the amount of the public good
is equal to the harm that he imposes on the other agents. Note that every
agent finds it advantageous to use this decision process since he is never
taxed by more than the decision is worth to him.
                                                                     Notes   429



23.9 Demand revealing mechanisms with a continuous good

Suppose now that we are concerned with the provision of a continuous
public good. If G units of the public good are provided, then consumer i
will have utility
                          vi(G) = ui(G) - siG,
where ui (G) is his (quasilinear) utility for the public good and si is his cost
share. Suppose that agent i is asked to report the function vi(G).
   Denote his reported function by bi(G). The government announces that
it will provide a level of the public good, G*, that maximizes the sum of
the reported functions. ~ a c h   - i will receive a
                                agent                    sidepayment
                                                             - .       equal to
Cjfi$(G*).
  In this mechanism, it is always in the interest of each agent i to truthfully
report his true utility function. To see this, simply note that individual i
wants to maximize
                              vi(G) +C    bj (GI,

while the government will maximize




By reporting bi(G) = vi(G), agent i ensures that the government will choose
a G* that maximizes his utility.
   As in the discrete case, the total sidepayments can be very large. How-
ever, just as before they can be reduced by an appropriate sidepayment.
The best choice in this case is the sidepayment - m a x ~ Cjfibj(G). This
leaves agent i with a net utility of




Note that the sum of the last two terms must be negative. As before, agent
i is taxed by the amount that he changes social welfare.


Notes

Efficiency conditions for public goods were first formulated by Samuel-
son (1954). The private provision of public goods has been extensively
studied by Bergstrom, Blume & Varian (1986). Lindahl (1919) introduced
the concept of Lindahl prices. The demand revealing mechanism was in-
troduced by Clarke (1971) and Groves (1973).
430 PUBLIC GOODS (Ch. 23)



Exercises

23.1. Consider the following game as a solution to the public goods problem
in the case of a discrete public good with two agents. Each agent i states
a "bid", bi. If bl + b2 2 c, the good is provided and each agent pays
their bid amount; otherwise, the good is not provided and neither agent
pays anything. Is the efficient outcome an2%equilibrium   to this game? Is
anything else an equilibrium?

23.2. Suppose that u1 and u2 are both homothetic in (xi, G). Derive the
conditions for the Nash equilibrium levels of contributions.

23.3. Suppose now that the two agents have different wealths, but identical
Cobb-Douglas utility functions, ui(G, xi) = G ~ X , ~ H- ~ OW. big does the
wealth difference between agent 1 and 2 have to be for agent 2 to contribute
zero in equilibrium?
23.4. Suppose that there are n agents with identical Cobb-Douglas utility
functions, ui(G, xi) = G ~ X : - ~ .
                                  There is a total amount of wealth w, which
is divided among k 5 n of the agents. How much of the public good is
provided? How does the amount of the public good change as k increases?
23.5. Does the Clarke tax result in a Pareto efficient allocation? Does the
Clarke tax result in a Pareto efficient amount of the public good?
23.6. A peculiar tribe of natives in the South Seas called the Grads con-
sume only coconuts. They use the coconuts for two purposes: either they
consume them for food, or they burn them in a public religious sacrifice.
(The Grads believe that this sacrifice will help their prelim performance.)
  Suppose that each Grad i has an initial endowment of coconuts of wi > 0.
Let xi > 0 be the amount of coconuts that he consumes, and let gi 2 0
be the amount of coconuts that he gives to the public offering. The total
number of coconuts contributed to the offering is G = C:=, gi. Grad i's
utility function is given by


where ai > 1.

   (a) In determining his gift, each Grad i assumes that the gifts of the
other Grads will remain constant and determines how much he will give on
this basis. Let

                                     J'#i
denote the gifts other than Grad i. Write down a utility maximization
problem that determines Grad i's gift.
                                                            Exercises   431


                            +
   (b) Recalling that G = gi G-i for all agents i, what will be the equi-
librium amount of the public good. (Hint: not every agent will contribute
a positive amount to the public good.)

  (c) Who will free-ride in this problem?

   (d) What is the Pareto efficient amount of the public good to provide
in this economy?
                      CHAPTER             24
        EXTERNALITIES

When the actions of one agent directly affect the environment of another
agent, we will say that there is an externality. In a consumption ex-
ternality the utility of one consumer is directly affected by the actions of
another consumer. For example, some consumers may be affected by other
agents' consumption of tobacco, alcohol, loud music, and so on. Consumers
might also be adversely affected by firms who produce pollution or noise.
   In production externality the production set of one firm is directly
affected by the actions of another agent. For example, the production of
smoke by a steel mill may directly affect the production of clean clothes by
a laundry, or the production of honey by a beekeeper might directly affect
the level of output of an apple orchard next door.
   In this chapter we explore the economics of externalities. We find that in
general market equilibria will be inefficient in the presence of externalities.
This naturally leads to an examination of various suggestions for alternative
ways to allocate resources that lead to efficient outcomes.
   The First Theorem of Welfare Economics does not hold in the presence
of externalities. The reason is that there are things that people care about
that are not priced. Achieving an efficient allocation in the presense of
externalities essentially involves making sure that agents face the correct
prices for their actions.
                                SOLUTIONS T O THE EXTERNALITIES PROBLEM   433




24.1 An example of a production externality

Suppose that we have two firms. Firm 1 produces an output x which it
sells in a competitive market. However, the production of x imposes a cost
e(x) on firm 2. For example, suppose the technology is such that x units of
output can only be produced by generating x units of pollution, and this
pollution harms firm 2.
   Letting p be the price of output, the profits of the two firms are given by

                            T I = max px - c(x)
                                   x



We assume that both cost functions are increasing and convex as usual. (It
may be that firm 2 receives profits from some production activity, but we
ignore this for simplicity.)
  The equilibrium amount of output, x,, is given by p = cl(x,). However,
this output is too large from a social point of view. The first firm takes
account of the p r i v a t e costs-the costs that it imposes on itself-but it
ignores the social costs-the private cost plus cost that it imposes on the
other firm.
  In order to determine the efficient amount of output, we ask what would
happen if the two firms merged so as to internalize the externality. In
this case the merged firm would maximize total profits



and this problem has first-order condition



The output xe is an efficient amount of output; it is characterized by price
being equal to marginal soczal cost.


24.2 Solutions to the externalities problem

There have been several solutions proposed to solve the inefficiency of ex-
ternalities.


Pigovian taxes

According t o this view, firm 1 simply faces the wrong price for its action,
and a corrective tax can be imposed that will lead to efficient resource
allocation. Corrective taxes of this sort are known as Pigovian taxes.
434 EXTERNALITIES (Ch. 24)


  Suppose, for example, that the firm faced a tax on its output in amount t.
Then the first-order condition for profit maximization becomes



Under our assumption of a convex cost function we can set t = el(x,), which
leads the firm to choose x = x,, as determined in equation (24.1). Even if
the cost function were not convex, we could simply impose a nonlinear tax
of e(x) on firm 1, thus leading it to internalize the cost of the externality.
   The problem with this solution is that it requires that the taxing au-
thority know the externality cost function e(x). But if the taxing authority
knows this cost function, it might as well just tell the firm how much to
produce in the first place.


Missing markets

According to this view, the problem is that firm 2 cares about the pollution
generated by firm 1 but has no way to influence it. Adding a market for firm
2 to express its demand for pollution-r for a reduction of pollution-will
provide a mechanism for efficient allocation.
   In our model when x units of output are produced, x units of pollution
are unavoidably produced. If the market price of pollution is r , then firm 1
can decide how much pollution it wants to sell, X I , and firm 2 can decide
how much it wants to buy, xz. The profit maximization problems become

                             = max pxl
                                 21
                                         + rxl - c(xl)
                         TZ = max     -rxz - e(xz).
                                 22



The first-order conditions are




When demand for pollution equals the supply of pollution, we have xl = XZ,
and these first-order conditions become equivalent to those given in (24.1).
Note that the equilibrium price of pollution, r, will be a negative number.
This is natural, since pollution is a "bad" not a good.
   More generally, suppose that pollution and output are not necessarily
produced in a one-to-one ratio. If firm 1 produces x units of output and y
units of pollution, then it pays a cost of c(x, y). Presumably increasing y
from zero lowers the cost of production of x; otherwise, there wouldn't be
any problem.
                                 SOLUTIONS TO THE EXTERNALITIES PROBLEM   435


 In the absence of any mechanism to control pollution, the profit maxi-
mization problem of firm 1 is



which has first-order conditions




Firm 1 will equate the price of pollution to its marginal cost. In this case
the price of pollution is zero, so firm 1 will pollute up to the point where
the costs of production are minimized.
   Now we add a market for pollution. Again, let r be the cost per unit
of pollution and yl and y2 the supply and demand by firms 1 and 2. The
maximization problems are

                       T I = max px
                             X,111
                                      + ryl - c(x, yl)

The first-order conditions are




Equating supply and demand, so yl = y2, we have the first-order conditions
for an efficient level of x and y.
  The problem with this solution is that the markets for pollution may
be very thin. In the case depicted there are only two firms. There is no
particular reason to think that such a market will behave competitively.


Property rights

According to this view, the basic problem is that property rights are not
conducive to full efficiency. If both technologies are operated by one firm,
we have seen that there is no problem. However, we will see that there
is a market signal that will encourage the agents to determine an efficient
pattern of property rights.
436 EXTERNALITIES (Ch. 24)


   If the externality of one firm adversely affects the operation of another,
it always will pay one firm to buy out the other. It is clear that by co-
ordinating the actions of both firms one can always produce more profits
than by acting separately. Therefore, one firm could afford to pay the
other firm its market value (in the presence of the externality) since its
value when the externality is optimally adjusted would exceed this current
market value. This argument shows the market mechanism itself provides
signals to adjust property rights to internalize externalities.
   We have already established this claim in some generality in the proof of
the First Welfare Theorem in Chapter 18, page 345. The argument there
shows that if an allocation is not Pareto efficient, then there is some way
that aggregate profits can be increased. A careful examination of the proof
of the theorem shows that all that is necessary is that all goods that con-
sumers care about are priced, or, equivalently, that consumers' preferences
depend only on their own consumption bundles. There can be arbitrary
sorts of production externalities and the proof still goes through up to the
last line, where we show that aggregate profits at the Pareto dominating
allocation exceed aggregate profits at the original allocation. If there are
no production externalities, this is a contradiction. If production external-
ities are present, then this argument shows that there is some alternative
production plan that increases aggregate profits-hence there is a market
incentive for one firm to buy out the others, coordinate their production
plans, and internalize the externality.
   Essentially, the firm grows until it internalizes all relevant production
externalities. This works well for some sorts of externalities, but not for
all. For example, it doesn't deal very well with the case of consumption
externalities, or the case of externalities that are public goods.


24.3 The compensation mechanism
We argued above that Pigovian taxes were not adequate in general to solve
externalities due to the information problem: the taxing authority in gen-
eral can't be expected to know the costs imposed by the externalities.
However, it may be that the agents who generate the externalities have a
reasonably good idea of the costs they impose. If so, there is a relatively
simple scheme to internalize the externalities.
  The scheme involves setting up a market for the externality, but it does
so in a way that encourages the firms to correctly reveal the costs they
impose on the other. Here is how the method works.

Announcement stage. Firm i = 1,2 names a Pigovian tax ti which may
or may not be the efficient level of such a tax.
Choice stage. If firm 1 produces x units of output, then it has to pay
a tax t2x, and firm 2 receives compensation in the amount of tlx. In
                                         THE COMPENSATION MECHANISM       437


addition, each firm pays penalty depending on the difference between their
two announced tax rates.

   The exact form of the penalty is irrelevant for our purposes; all that
matters is that it is zero when t l = t2 and positive otherwise. For purposes
of exposition, we choose a quadratic penalty. In this case, the final payoffs
to firm 1 and firm 2 are given by

                   nl = max px - c(x) - t2x - (tl - t2)2
                          x



   We want to show that the equilibrium outcome to this game involves
an efficient level of production of the externality. In order to do this, we
have to think a bit about what constitutes a reasonable equilibrium notion
for this game. Since the game has two stages, it is reasonable to demand
a subgame perfect equilibrium-that is, an equilibrium in which each
firm takes into account the repercussions of its first-stage choices on the
outcomes in the second stage. See Chapter 15, page 275.
   As usual, we solve this game by looking at the second stage first. Con-
sider the output choice in the second stage. Firm 1 will choose x to satisfy
the condition
                                p = cl(x) +t2                         (24.2).
For each choice of t2, there will be some optimal choice of x(t2). If cIt(x) >
0, then it is straightforward to show that xt(t2) < 0.
   In the first stage, each firm will choose tax rates so as to maximize their
profits. For firm 1, the choice is simple: if firm 2 chooses t2, then firm 1
also wants to choose
                                     tl = t2.                           (24.3)
To check this, just differentiate firm 1's profit function with respect to tl.
   Things are a little trickier for firm 2, since it has to recognize that its
choice of t2 affects firm 1's output through the function x(t2). Differenti-
ating firm 2's profit function, taking account of this influence, we have



Putting (24.2), (24.3), and (24.4) together, we find



which is the condition for efficiency.
   This method works by setting opposing incentives for the two agents.
It is clear from (24.3) that agent 1 always has an incentive to match the
announcement of agent 2. But consider agent 2's incentive. If agent 2
thinks that agent 1 will propose a large compensation rate tl for him,
438 EXTERNALITIES (Ch. 24)

then he wants agent 1 to be taxed as little as possible--so that agent 1
will produce as much as possible. On the other hand, if agent 2 thinks
that 1 will propose a small compensation rate for him, then agent 2 wants
agent 1 to be taxed as much as possible. The only point where agent 2 is
indifferent about the production level of agent 1 is where agent 2 is exactly
compensated, on the margin, for the costs of the externaIity.


24.4 Efficiency conditions in the presence of externalities
Here we derive general efficiency conditions in the presence of externalities.
Suppose that there are two goods, an x-good and a y-good, and two agents.
Each agent cares about the other agent's consumption of the x-good, but
neither agent cares about the other agent's consumption of the y-good.
Initially, there are units of the x-good available and jj units of the y-
good.
   According to Chapter 17, page 332, a Pareto efficient allocation maxi-
mizes the sum of the utilities subject to the resource constraint


                such that X I + x2 = f
                             Y1   + 3 2 = g-
The first-order conditions are
                                dul            au2
                              al-+a:!-               =A
                                axl            8x1
                                dul            du2
                              al-+a2-                =A
                                ax2            8x2
                                               au1
                                          a      1 = p
                                               ayl
                                               au2
                                          a      2 = p.
                                               ay2
After some manipulation, these conditions can be written as




The efficiency condition is that the sum of the marginal rates of substitution
equals a constant. When determining whether or not it is a good idea
                                                                  Exercises   439


whether agent 1 should increase his consumption of good 1, we have to
take into account not how much he is willing to pay for this additional
consumption, but how much agent 2 is willing to pay. These are essentially
the same conditions as the efficiency conditions for a public good.
  It is clear from these conditions how to internalize the externality. We
simply regard xl and x2 as different goods. The price of xl is pl = du2/dx1,
and the price of 2 2 is p2 = dul/ax2. If each agent faces the appropriate price
for his actions, the market equilibrium will lead to an efficient outcome.


Notes

Pigou (1920) and Coase (1960) are classic works on externalities. The
compensation mechanism is examined further in Varian (1989b).


Exercises

24.1. Suppose that two agents are deciding how fast to drive their cars.
Agent i chooses speed xi and gets utility ui(xi) from this choice; we assume
that ui(xi) > 0. However, the faster the agents drive, the more likely it is
that they are involved in a mutual accident. Let p(xl, x2) be the probability
of an accident, assumed to be increasing in each argument, and let ci > 0
be the cost that the accident imposes on agent i . Assume that each agent's
utility is linear in money.

  (a) Show that each agent has an incentive to drive too fast from the
social point of view.

  (b) If agent i is fined an amount ti in the case of an accident, how large
should ti be to internalize the externality?

   (c) If the optimal fines are being used, what are the total costs, including
fines, paid by the agents? How does this compare to the total cost of the
accident?

  (d) Suppose now that agent i gets utility ui(x) only if there is no acci-
dent. What is the appropriate fine in this case?
                      CHAPTER             25

        INFORMATION


The most rapidly growing area in economic theory in the last decade has
been the area of information economics. In this chapter we will describe
some of the basic themes of this subject.
   Most of what we will study involves situations of a s y m m e t r i c infor-
m a t i o n , that is, situations where one economic agent knows something
that another economic agent doesn't. For example, a worker might have
a better idea of how much he could produce than his employer does, or
a producer might have a better idea of the quality of a good he produces
than a potential consumer has.
   However, by carefully observing the worker's behavior, the employer
might be able to infer something about his productivity. Similarly, a con-
sumer might be able to infer something about the quality of a firm's product
based on how it is sold. Good workers might want to be known as good
workers, or they might not, depending on how they are paid. Producers
of high-quality products would generally like to be known as such, but
producers of low-quality products would also like t o acquire a reputation
for high-quality. Hence, studies of behavior under asymmetric information
necessarily involve strategic interaction of agents.
                                          THE PRINCIPAL-AGENT PROBLEM     441



25.1 The principal-agent problem

Many kinds of incentive problems can be modeled using the following frame-
  ork. One person. the principal, wants t o induce another person, the
agent, to take some action which is costly to the agent. The principal may
be unable to directly observe the action of the agent, but instead observes
some output, x, that is determined, at least in part, by the actions of the
agent. The principal's problem is to design an incentive p a y m e n t from
the principal to the agent, s(x), that induces the agent to take the best
action from the viewpoint of the principal.
   The simplest example of a principal-agent problem is that of a manager
and a worker. The manager wants the worker to exert as much effort as
possible, in order to produce as much output as possible, while the worker
w
rationally  wants to make a choice that maximizes his own utility given the
effort and incentive payment scheme.
   A slightly less obvious example is that of a retail firm and a customer.
The firm wants the customer to buy its product-a costly activity for the
buyer. The firm would like to charge each customer his reservation p r i c e
the maximum he would be willing to pay. The firm can't observe this
reservation price directly, but it can observe the amount that consumers
with different tastes would purchase at different prices. The problem of the
firm is then to design a pricing schedule that maximizes its profits. This is
the problem a monopolist faces when it price discriminates; see Chapter 14,
page 244.
   We refer to this kind of problem as a principal-agent problem. In the
following sections we will examine the manager-worker problem, but it is
not hard to generalize to other contexts such as nonlinear pricing.
   Let x be the output received by the principal and let a and b be possible
actions that can be chosen by the agent out of some set of feasible actions,
A. In some of what follows it will be convenient t o suppose that there
are only two feasible actions, but we do not impose that restriction at
this point. Initially, we suppose that there is no uncertainty so that the
outcome is completely determined by the actions of the agent, and we write
this relationship as x = x(a). Let c(a) be the cost of action a and s(x) the
incentive payment from the principal to the agent.
   The utility function of the principal is x - s(x), the output minus the
incentive payment, and the utility function of the agent is s(x) - c(a),
the incentive payment minus the cost of the action. The principal wants to
choose a function, s(.), that maximizes his utility subject to the constraints
imposed by the agent's optimizing behavior.
   There are typically two sorts of constraints involving the agent. The
first is that the agent may have another opportunity available to him that
gives him some reservation level of utility, and that the principal must
ensure that the agent gets at least this reservation level in order to be
442 INFORMATION (Ch.25)


willing to participate. We call this the participation constraint. (This
is sometimes called the individual rationality constraint.)
   The second constraint on the problem is that of incentive compati-
bility: given the incentive schedule the principal chooses, the agent will
pick the best action for himself. The principal is not able to choose the
agent's action directly: he can only influence the action by his choice of
the incentive payment.
   We will be concerned with two sorts of principal-agent environments.
The first is where there is one principal who acts as a monopolist: he sets
a payment schedule which the agent will accept as long as it is expected
to yield more than the agent's reservation level of utility. Here we want to
determine the properties of the incentive scheme that is optimal from the
viewpoint of the principal. The second is where there are many competing
principals, who each set incentive schemes, and we wish to determine the
properties of the equilibrium incentive payment systems.
   In the monopoly problem, the reservation level of utility to the agent is
exogenous: it will typically be the utility associated with some unrelated
activity. In the competitive problem, the reservation level of utility is en-
dogenous: it is the utility associated with the contracts offered by the other
principals. Similarly, in the monopoly problem, the maximum achievable
profits are the objective function of the problem. But in the competitive
problem, we normally assume that the profits have been competed away in
equilibrium. Hence a zero-profit condition becomes an important equilib-
rium condition.


25.2 Full information: monopoly solution
We start with the simplest example in which the principal has full infor-
mation about the agent's costs and actions. In this case, the principal's
goal is simply to determine what action he wants the agent to choose, and
to design an incentive payment to induce the agent to choose that action.
Since there is only one principal, we refer to this as the monopoly case.'
  Let a denote various actions that the agent can take and let output be
some known function of the action, x(a). Let b be the action the principal
wants to induce. (Think of b as being the "best" action for the principal
and a the "alternative" actions.)
  The problem of designing the optimal incentive scheme s(.) can be writ-
ten as

              max x(b) - s(x(b))
              b,s(.)


  We could call this a monopsony case, since we are dealing with a single buyer rather
  than a single seller, but I use the term monopoly in a general sense to include the
  cases of both a single buyer and/or a single seller.
                                 FULL INFORMATION: MONOPOLY SOLUTION        443


           such that s(x(b))- c(b) 2 E                                    (25.1)
                      s(x(b)) - c(b) 2 s(x(a)) - c(a) for all a in A.     (25.2)
Condition (25.1) imposes the constraint that the agent must receive at
least his reservation level of utility since one possible "action" is not to
participate; this is the participation constraint. Condition (25.2) imposes
the constraint that the agent will find it optimal to choose b; this is the
incentive compatibility constraint. Note that the principal actually chooses
the agent's action b, albeit indirectly, in his design of the incentive payment
function. The constraint the principal faces is to make sure that the action
that the agent wants to take is in fact the action that the principal wants
him to take.
   Although this maximization problem looks peculiar at first glance, it
turns out to have a trivial solution. Let us ignore the incentive compati-
bility constraint for a moment. Focusing on the objective function and the
participation constraint, we observe that for any x the principal wants s(x)
to be as small as possible. According to the the participation constraint,
                                                              +
(25.1), this means that s(x(b)) should be set equal to 71 c(b); i.e., the
payment to the agent covers the cost of the action and leaves him with his
reservation utility.
   Hence the optimal action, from the viewpoint of the principal, is the one
that maximizes x(b) - E - c(b). Call this action b*, and the associated
output level x* = x(b*). The question is: can we set up an incentive
schedule, s(x), that makes b* the optimal choice for the agent? But this is
easy: just choose any function s(x) such that s(x*)- c(b*) 2 s(x(a))- c(a)
for d l a in A. For example, let

                     s(x*) =    t   + c(V) if x = x(V)
                                             otherwise.
This incentive scheme is a target output scheme: a target output of x*
is set and the agent is paid his reservation price if he reaches the target and
otherwise receives an arbitrarily large punishment. (Actually, any payment
less than the payment if the agent reaches the target would work.)
   This is only one of many possible incentive schemes that solves the in-
centive problem. Another choice would be to choose a linear incentive
payment and set s(x(a)) = x(a) - F . In this case the agent must pay a
lumpsum fee F to the principal and then receives the entire output pro-
duced. This scheme works because the agent has the incentive to choose the
action that maximizes x(a) - c(a). The payment F is chosen so the agent
just satisfies the participation constraint; i.e, F = x(b*)- c(b*)- 71. In this
case the agent is the residual claimant to the output produced. Once
the agent pays the principal the amount F, the agent gets all remaining
profits.
   There are a couple of things to observe about these solutions to the
full-information principal-agent problem. First, the incentive compatibil-
ity constraint really isn't "binding." Once the optimal level of output is
444 INFORMATION (Ch. 2 5 )


chosen, it is always possible to choose an incentive scheme that will support
that as an optimizing choice by the agent. Second, since the incentive com-
patibility constraint is never binding, the Pareto efficient amount of output
 will always be produced. That is, there is no way to produce another out-
put level that both the principal and the agent prefer. This follows from
observing that the maximization problem without the incentive constraint
is the standard form for Pareto optimization: maximize one agent's utility
holding the other agent's utility constant.
   The difficulty with these incentive schemes is that they are very sensitive
to slight imperfections in information. Suppose, for example, that the re-
lationship between input and output is not perfectly determinate. Perhaps
there is some "noise" in the system, so that low output may be due to bad
luck, rather than lack of effort. In this case an incentive scheme of the sort
described above may not be appropriate. If the agent only gets paid when
he achieves the target level of output, then his expected utility-averaged
over the randomized outputs-may be less than his reservation level of
utility. Hence he would refuse to participate.
   In order to satisfy the participation constraint, the principal must offer
the agent a payment scheme that yields the agent his reservation level of
utility. Typically, such a scheme will involve positive payments at a number
of output levels, since a number of different outputs may be consistent with
the targeted level of effort. This type of problem is known as a hidden
action incentive problem, since the action of the agent is not perfectly
observable by the principal.
   The second sort of imperfect information of interest is where the principal
cannot perfectly observe the objective function of the agent. There may
be many different types of agents with different utility functions or cost
functions. The principal must design an incentive scheme that does well,
on the average, whatever type of agent is involved. This type of incentive
problem is known as the hidden information problem, since the difficulty
is that the information about the type of agent is hidden to the principal.
We will analyze these two sorts of incentive problems below.


25.3 Full information: competitive solution

Before turning to that discussion, it is of interest to examine the full infor-
mation principal-agent problem in a competitive environment. As indicated
above, one way to close the model is to add the condition that competition
forces profits to zero.
  To fix ideas, suppose that there is a group of producers and a group of
identical workers. Each producer sets an incentive system in an attempt
to attract workers to his factory. The producers must compete against one
another to attract workers, and the workers must compete against each
other to get jobs.
                                    HIDDEN ACTION MONOPOLY SOLUTION          445


   The optimization problem facing a given producer is just the same as in
the monopoly case: he sees how much it will cost to induce various levels of
effort, and how much it costs to attract workers to his factory, and chooses
the combination that maximizes revenue minus cost.
   We have seen that in this case an optimal incentive scheme may be chosen
to have payment as a linear function of output, so s ( x ) = x - F . In the
monopoly model, F was determined from the participation constraint



where I is the level of utility available in some other activity exogenous to
the model.
   In a competitive model this is generally not appropriate. In this frame-
work the way t o determine F is to suppose that the participation constraint
is not binding, but that competition in the industry pushes profits to zero.
In this case F is determined by the condition that



which implies F = 0. The workers capture their entire marginal product
and "monopoly rents" are driven t o zero.
   The fact that equilibrium rents are zero is an artifact of the constant-
returns-tescale technology. If the producers have some fixed costs K, then
the equilibrium condition would require that F = K.
   F'rom a formal point of view, the main difference between the monop-
olistic and the competitive solution is how the rent F is determined. In
the monopoly model it is that amount that makes the worker indifferent
between working for the principal and engaging in some other activity. In
the competitive model, the rent is determined by the zero-profit condition.


25.4 Hidden action: monopoly solution

In this section we will examine a simple model of a principal-agent relation-
ship in which the actions are not directly observable. We will make a num-
ber of assumptions to make the analysis easy. In particular we will assume
that there are only a finite number of possible output levels ( x l ,. . . , xn).
The agent can take one of two actions, a or b, which influence the probabil-
ity of occurrence of the various outputs. Thus we let T,, be the probability
that output level x, is observed if the agent chooses action a and ~ , bis the
probability that x, is observed if the agent chooses action b. Let s, = s(x,)
be the payment from the principal to the agent if x, is observed. Then the
expected profit of the principal if the agent chooses action b, say, is
446 INFORMATION (Ch.25)


  As for the agent, let us suppose that he is risk averse and seeks to max-
imize some von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function of the payment,
u(s,), and that the cost of his action, c,, enters linearly into his utility
function. Hence the agent will choose the action b if




and will choose the action a otherwise. This is the incentive compatibility
constraint.
   We also suppose that one of the actions available to the agent is not to
participate. Suppose that if the agent doesn't participate, he gets utility
ii. Hence, the expected utility from participation must be at least ii:




This is the participation constraint.
   The principal wants to maximize (25.3) subject to the constraints (25.4)
and (25.5). The maximization takes place over the action b and the pay-
ments (si). Note that both individuals are making optimizing choices in
this problem. The agent is going to choose an action b that is best for the
agent given the incentive system (si) set up by the principal. Understand-
ing this, the principal wants to offer the pattern of incentive payments
that is best for the principal. Thus the principal must take the subse-
quent actions of the agent as a constraint in the design of the incentive
payments. Effectively, the principal is choosing the action for the agent
that he desires, taking into account the cost of doing svnamely, that he
must structure the incentive payment so that the principal's desired action
is also the agent's desired action.


Agent's action can be observed

In the full information problem discussed in the last section, it was irrele-
vant whether the payment scheme was based on the action or the output.
That was because there was a one-to-one relationship between actions and
output. In this problem the distinction is crucial. If the payment can
be based on the action, it is possible to implement a first-best incentive
scheme, even if the output is random. All that the principal has to do is to
determine the (expected) profit from inducing each possible action by the
agent, and then induce the action that maximizes the principal's expected
profit.
  To see this mathematically, suppose that the principal can pay the agent
as a function of the action the agent takes, rather than the output. Then
                                   HIDDEN ACTION: MONOPOLY SOLUTION        447


the agent will get some payment s(b). Note that this payment is certain, so
                                         - cb = u(s(b))- cb. The incentive
that the agent's utility is xy=l aibu(s(b))
problem described above reduces to




                   such that u(s(b))- cb 2 a


This is just like the full-information problem examined earlier: the incentive
compatibility constraint is inessential.
   The interesting case of the principal-agent problem arises only when the
actions are hidden so that the incentive payment can only be based on
output. In this case the payments to the agent are necessarily random
and the optimal incentive scheme will involve some degree of risk-sharing
between the principal and the agent. The principal would like to pay the
agent less when less output is produced, but the principal can't tell whether
the small output is due to inadequate effort by the agent or simply to bad
luck. If the principal punishes low output too much, he will impose too
much risk on the agent, and will have to raise the average level of payoff to
compensate for this. This is the tradeoff facing the principal in designing
an optimal incentive mechanism.
   Suppose that there was no incentive problem, and that the only issue is
risk sharing. In this case, the principal's maximization problem is

                             max x ( z i - si)nib
                             ( s t ) i=l



                      such that   xn


                                  i=l
                                        u(si)rrib- cb 2 a.

Letting X be the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint, the first-order con-
dition is
                         - r i b - Xul(si)rib= 0,

which implies ul(si)= a constant, which means that si = constant. Essen-
tially, the principal fully insures the agent against all risk. This is natural
since the principal is risk neutral and the agent is risk averse.
   This solution will generally not be appropriate when there is some incen-
tive constraint. If the principal provides full insurance, the agent doesn't
care what outcome occurs, so there is no incentive for him to choose the
action desired by the principal: if the agent receives a certain payment,
regardless of his effort, why should he work hard? The determination of
the optimal incentive contract involves trading off the benefits from the
principal insuring the agent with the incentive costs that such insurance
creates.
448 INFORMATION (Ch. 251



Analysis of the optimal incentive scheme

We will investigate the design of the optimal incentive scheme using the
following strategy. First we will determine the optimal incentive scheme
necessary to induce each possible action. Then we will compare the utility
of these schemes to the principal t o see which is the least costly scheme
from his point of view. For simplicity, we suppose that only two actions are
possible, a, and b, and ask how we can design a scheme to induce action
b, say. Let V ( b ) be the largest possible utility that the principal receives
if he designs a scheme that induces the agent to choose action b. The
maximization problem facing the principal is




                              n
               such that                          ~ 2B
                                  u ( ~ , ) l i-, cb
                           z=1




Here condition (25.6) is the participation constraint and condition (25.7)
is the incentive compatibility constraint.
    This is a problem with a linear objective function and nonlinear con-
straints. Although it can be analyzed directly, it is convenient for graph-
ical treatment to reformulate the problem as one with linear constraints
and nonlinear objective. Let u, be the utility achieved in outcome i, so
that u ( s , ) = u,. Let f be the inverse of the utility function, and write
s , = f ( u , ) . The function f simply indicates how much it costs the prin-
cipal t o provide utility u, to the agent. It is straightforward to show that
 f is an increasing, convex function. Rewriting (25.6) and (25.7) using this
notation, we have


                V ( b )= max
                        ("A
                                  x(r,
                                  ,=I
                                        -




Here we view the problem as choosing a distribution of utility for the agent,
where the cost to the principal of providing u, is s , = f (u,).
                                    HIDDEN ACTION: MONOPOLY SOLUTION      449


   This problem can be analyzed graphically when n = 2. In this case there
are only two output levels, x1 and 22, and the principal only needs t o set
two utility levels, u1, the utility received by the agent when the output
level is X I , and u2, the utility received when the output level is 22.
   The constraint set determined by (25.8)-(25.9) is shown in Figure 25.1.
The agent's indifference curves if he chooses actions a or b will just be
straight lines of the form

                       rlbu1   + r 2 b U 2 cb = constant
                                       -

                      rlaul    + ~ 2 - C,~ = ~constant.
                                                     2


Look at the incentive compatibility constraint (25.9)' and consider the
utility pairs (u1,u2) where the agent is just indifferent between action b
and action a. These are points where an indifference curve for action a
intersects the indifference curve for action b associated with the same level
of utility. The locus of all such pairs (ul, u2) satisfies the equation



Solving for uz as a function of u1, we have




The coefficient of u1 is 1 since



It follows that the incentive compatibilty line determined in equation (25.10)
has a slope of + l . The region where action b is preferred by the agent is
the region above this line.
   The participation constraint requires that



The set of (ul, u2) where this condition is satisfied as an equality is simply
one of the bindifference curves for the agent. The intersection of the region
satisfying incentive compatibility and the region satisfying the participation
constraint is depicted in Figure 25.1.
   This figure also depicts the forty-five degree line. This line is important
because it depicts those combinations of ul and u2 where ul = ua. We
have seen that if there were no incentive compatibility constraint, the prin-
cipal would simply insure the agent and the optimal solution satisfies the
condition that ul = u2 = E.
   Due to the incentive compatibility constraint, the full-insurance point
may not be feasible. The nature of the solution to the principal-agent
         450 INFORMATION (Ch. 25)




                              k                     incentive compatibility h e




                                                ~nd~fference
                                                          curve

                                                        a ind~fferencecurve




Figure         The feasible set for principal-agent problem with hidden
25.1           action. The region to the northeast of the participation line
               satisfies the participation constraint. The region to the north-
               west of the incentive compatibility line satisfies the incentive
               compatibility constraint. The intersection of these two regions
               is the shaded area.

         problem depends on whether the incentive compatibility line intercepts the
         vertical or the horizontal axis. We have illustrated these cases in Fig-
         ure 25.2. To find the optimal solution, we simply plot the indifference
         curves of the principal. These will be lines of the form




         The utility of the principal increases as s l and s 2 decrease. What do we
         know about the slope? The slope of the principal's indifference curves is
         given by
                                       MRS = - m b f l ( u l )
                                                   r 2 b f 1 ( u 2 )'

         When u l = u 2 , we must have M R S = - T ~ ~ / TSince       the agent's indif-
                                                                  ~ ~ .
                                                                          +
         ference curves are determined by the condition ~ l b u l T2btLb = constant,
         the slope of his indifference curves when ul = u 2 is also given by - T l b / ~ 2 ~ .
         Hence the principal's indifference curve must be tangent t o the agent's
         indifference curve along the 45-degree line. This is simply the geometric
         consequence of the fact that the principal will fully insure the agent if there
         is no incentive problem.
            Hence, if the full-insurance solution is feasible, as depicted in Figure
         25.2B, that will be the optimal solution. If the full-insurance solution is
                                    HIDDEN ACTION MONOPOLY SOLUTION        451




                                                            Pnnc~pal's
                                                            lnd~fference
                                                            curves




     Two solutions to the principal-agent problem. In panel                      Figure
     A we have depicted the case where the optimal solution involves             25.2
     the agent bearing some risk; panel B depicts the case where full
     insurance is optimal.

not feasible, we find that the optimal solution will involve the agent bearing
some risk
  In order to investigate the nature of the optimal incentive scheme alge-
braically, we return to the n-outcome case, and set up the Lagrangian for
the maximization problem described in (25.6-25.7).




                                                 u(s,)(n,s- n,,)
                                                                   I   .
The Kuhn-Tucker first-order conditions can be found by differentiating this
expression with respect t o s,. This gives us

                 -nzb   + Xur(s,)n,b+ pur(s,)[n,b- n,,] = 0.
Dividing through by n , b ~ r ( ~
                               and, )rearranging, we have the fundamental
equation determining the shape of the incentive scheme:




We can generally expect that the constraint on reservation utility will be
binding so that X > 0.
452 INFORMATION (Ch. 25)


   The second constraint is more problematic; as we've seen from our graph-
ical analysis it may or may not be binding. Suppose that p = 0. Then
equation (25.11) implies that ul(si) is equal to some constant 1/X; i.e., that
the payment to the agent is independent of the outcome. It follows that si
is equal to some constant 3. Substituting into the incentive compatibility
constraint, we find that




Since each probability distribution sums to 1, this implies that



Hence this case can only arise when the action that is preferred by the prin-
cipal is also the low-cost action for the agent. This is the case depicted in
Figure 25.2B in which there is no conflict of interest between the principal
and the agent, and the principal simply provides insurance for the agent.
   Turning to the case where the constraint is binding and consequently
p > 0, we see that in general the payment to the agent, si, will vary with
the outcome xi. This is the case where the principal desires the action
which imposes high costs on the agent, so the payment to the agent will
depend on the behavior of the fraction ria/7Tib.
   In the statistics literature, an expression of the form r i a l r i b is known as
a likelihood ratio. It measures the ratio of the likelihood of observing xi
given that the agent chose a to the likelihood of observing xi given that
the agent chose b. A high value of the likelihood ratio is evidence in favor
of the view that the agent chose a, while a low value of the likelihood ratio
suggests that the agent chose b.
   The appearance of the likelihood ratio in the formula strongly suggests
that the construction of the optimal incentive scheme is closely related to
statistical problems of inference. This suggests that we can bring regu-
larity conditions from the statistics literature to bear on the problem of
analyzing the behavior of optimal schemes. For example, one commonly
used condition, the Monotone Likelihood R a t i o Property, requires
that the ratio rialribe monotone decreasing in xi. If this condition is
satisfied, then it follows that s(xi) will be a monotone increasing function
of xi. See Milgrom (1981) for details. The remarkable feature of equation
(25.11) is how simple the optimal incentive scheme is: it is essentially a
linear function of the likelihood ratio.


EXAMPLE: Comparative statics

As usual, we can learn some things about the optimal incentive scheme by
examining the Lagrangian for this problem. The envelope theorem tells
                                    HIDDEN ACTION: MONOPOLY SOLUTION      453


us that the the derivative of the principal's optimized value function with
respect to a parameter of the problem is just equal to the derivative of the
Lagrangian with respect to the same parameter.
  For example, the derivatives of the Lagrangian with respect t o c, and cb
are
                              dC

                              dC
                              - = - ( A+ p).
                              deb
These derivatives can be used to answer the age-old question: which is
better, the carrot or the stick? Think of the carrot as decreasing the cost
of the chosen action b and the stick as increasing the cost of the alternative
action a by the same magnitude. According to equations (25.12), a small
decrease in the cost of the chosen action always increases the principal's
utility by a larger amount than an increase of the same magnitude in cost
of the alternative action. Effectively, the carrot relaxes two constraints,
while the stick relaxes only one.
   Next consider a change in the probability distribution (dria). The effect
on the principal's utility of such a change is given by




This shows that when the incentive compatibility constraint is binding
so that p > 0, the interests of the principal and the agent are diamet-
rically opposed with respect to changes in the probability distribution of
the alternative action: any change that makes the agent better off must
unambiguously make the principal worse off.


EXAMPLE: Principal-agent model with mean-variance utility

Here is a simple example of an incentive scheme based on Holmstrom &
Milgrom (1987). Let the action a represent the effort of the agent and let
      +
2 = a E be the output observed by the principal. The random variable E
has a Normal distribution with mean zero and variance a2.
  Suppose that the incentive scheme chosen by the principal is linear, so
              +               +
that s(5) = 6 y 2 = 6 + y a yE. Here 6 and y are the parameters t o be
determined. Since the principal is risk neutral, his utility is



   Suppose that the agent has a constant absolute risk averse utility func-
tion, u(w) = -e-'",   where r is absolute risk aversion and w is wealth.
454 INFORMATION (Ch. 25)


                                              +
The agent's wealth is simply s(5) = 6 75. Since 5 is Normally dis-,
tributed, wealth will be Normally distributed. We have seen in Chapter 11,
page 189, that in this case the agent's utility depends linearly on the mean
and variance of wealth. It follows that the agent's utility associated with
                                  +
the incentive payment s(2) = 6 y5 will be given by




  The agent wants to maximize this utility minus the cost of effort, c(a):




This gives us the first-order condition



  The principal's maximization problem is to determine the optimal S and
y,subject to the constraint that the agent receive some level of reservation
utility ii and to the incentive constraint (25.13). This problem can be
written as
                         max (1 - y)a - 6
                         6,-r,a
                                          2
                                  +
                   such that 6 ya -
                                          2
                                              fo
                                                   2
                                                              >
                                                       - ~ ( a ) ii



Solve the first constraint for S and the second constraint for y and substitute
into the objective function. After some simplification, this gives us




Differentiating, we have the first-order condition



Solving for cl(a) = y, we find




  This equation displays the essential features of the solution. If a2 = 0,
so that there is no risk, we have y = 1: the optimal incentive scheme is of
the form s = 6 + 5.If a 2 > 0, we will have y < 1 so that each agent shares
some of the risk. The greater the uncertainty, or the more risk averse the
agent, the smaller y will be.
                                     HIDDEN ACTION: COMPETITIVE MARKET     455



25.5 Hidden action: competitive market

 What happens if there are many principals competing in the structure
 of their incentive contracts? In this case we may want to assume that
competition will push the profits of the principals to zero, and equilibrium
contracts must just break even. In this case, Figure 25.2 still applies, but
we simply reinterpret the levels of the isoprofit lines and the indifference
curves.
   Under competition the participation constraint is not binding, and the
zero-profit condition determines a particular isoprofit line for the principal.
As in the monopoly case, there are two possible equilibrium configurations:
full insurance or partial insurance.
   In a full-insurance contract all workers are getting paid a fixed amount
regardless of the output produced. They respond by putting in a minimal
level of effort. In a partial-insurance equilibrium the workers get a wage
that depends on output. Because the workers bear more risk, they put in a
larger amount of effort, in order to increase the probability that the larger
amount of output is produced.
   Consider the partial-insurance case depicted in Figure 25.3. In order for
this to be an equilibrium, there can be no other contract that yields higher
utility to the agent and higher profits to a firm. By construction, there
is no contract that induces action b with these properties; however, there
may be a contract that induces action a that will be Pareto preferred-i.e.,
a contract that will make positive profits and be preferred by the agents.
   In order to see whether such a contract exists, we draw the action a-
indifference curve passing through the partial-insurance contract and the
action a zero-profit line. If the zero-profit line doesn't intersect the region
preferred by the worker, as in Figure 25.3a, the partial-insurance contract is
an equilibrium. If the zero-profit line does intersect the workers' preferred
region, as in Figure 25.3B, then this cannot be an equilibrium since some
firm could offer a full-insurance contract that would yield positive profits
and still appeal to the workers holding the partial-insurance contract. In
this case no equilibrium may exist.


EXAMPLE: Moral hazard in insurance markets

In the context of an insurance market, the principal-agent problem with
hidden action is known as the moral hazard problem. The "moral haz-
ard" is that the purchasers of insurance policies will not take an appropri-
ate level of care. Let us examine this problem in the context of our earlier
analysis of insurance in Chapter 11, page 180.
  Suppose there are many identical consumers who are contemplating buy-
ing insurance against auto theft. If a consumer's auto is stolen, he bears
         456 INFORMATION (Ch 25)




                                                    Act~ona
                                                  id~fference
                                                       curve



                                                     Act~ona
                                                   zero-profit
                                                        curve




Figure        Equilibrium contracts. In panel A the partial-insurance
25.3          contract is an equilibrium. In panel B it is not, since the zero-
              profit line under action a intersects the preferred sets for the
              agent.


         a cost L. Let state 1 be the state of nature where the consumer's auto
         is stolen, and state 2 be the state where it is not. The probability that a
         consumer's auto is stolen depends on his actions-say whether he locks the
         car. Let 7rlb be the probability of theft if the consumer remembers to lock
         his car, and n l , be the probability of theft if the consumer forgets to lock
         his car. Let c be the cost of remembering to lock the car, and let s, be the
         net insurance payment from the consumer to the firm in state i. Finally,
         let w be the wealth of the consumer.
            Assuming that the insurance company wants the consumer to lock his
         car, the incentive problem is

                          max rlbsl
                          31 r32
                                      + 7r2bs2
                                                  +
                     Such that rlbu(w- Sl - L ) T ~ ~ U (-W~ 2 -) C    >
                               7 r l b ~ (-       +
                                          w S1 - L)  T ~ ~ U (-W5 2 ) - c

                                                         +
                                    2 7r1,u(w - S 1 - L) r2,u(w - 5 2 ) .

         If there is no incentive problem, so that the probability of the theft occur-
         ring is independent of the actions of the agent, and if competition in the
         insurance industry forces expected profits to zero, we have seen in C h a p
                                                                            +
         ter 11, page 180, that the optimal solution will involve srr: = sl L. That
         is, the insurance company will fully insure the consumer, so that he has
         the same wealth whether or not the theft occurs.
            When the probability of the loss depends on the actions of the agent,
         full insurance will no longer be optimal. In general, the principal wants
         to make the agent's consumption depend on his choices so as to leave him
         the incentive to take proper care. In this case the consumer's demand for
                                       HIDDEN INFORMATION: MONOPOLY       457

insurance will be rationed. The consumer would like to buy more insurance
at actuarily fair rates, but the industry will not offer such contracts since
that would induce the consumer to take an inadequate level of care.
  In the competitive case, the participation constraint is not binding, and
the equilibrium is determined by the zero-profit condition and the incentive
compatibility constraint:




These two equations determine the equilibrium (s;, sz). As usual, we have
to check to make sure that there are no full-insurance contracts that can
break this equilibrium. Without additional assumptions there may well be
such contracts, so that no equilibrium may exist in this model.


25.6 Hidden information: monopoly
We now consider the other type of principal-agent problem, where the
information about the utility or cost function of the agent is not observable.
For simplicity, we suppose that there are only two types of agents who are
distinguished by their cost functions and let the action of an agent be the
amount of output he produces. In the context of the worker-employer model
discussed previously, we now assume that output is observed perfectly by
the firm, but some workers find it more costly to produce than others. The
firm can perfectly observe the actions of a worker, but it can't tell how
costly those actions are to the worker.
   Let xt and ct(x) be the output and cost function of an agent of type t .
For definiteness, let agent 2 be the high-cost agent, so that c2(x) > c ~ ( x )
for all x. Let s(x) be the payment as a function of output and suppose
that agent t's utility function is of the form s(x) - ct(x). The principal is
unsure of the type of agent he faces, but he attaches a probability of rt
that it is type t. As usual, we require that each agent receive at least his
reservation level of utility which we take for simplicity to be zero.
   It will be convenient to make one further assumption about the cost
functions, namely that the agent with higher total costs also has higher
                                  > c:(x) for a11 x. This is sometimes called
marginal costs; i.e., that c ~ ( x )
the single-crossing property, since it implies that any given indifference
curve for a type 1 agent crosses any given indifference curve of a type 2
agent at most once. We observe the following simple fact, which you are
asked to prove in an exercise:

Single-crossing property. Assume that cL(x) > c',(x) for all x. It follows
that for any two distinct levels of output xl and x2, with x2 > X I , we must
have 4 x 2 ) - ~ ~ ( 5>1 )cl(x2) - cl(x1).
         458 INFORMATION (Ch. 25)

            It is instructive to consider what the optimal incentive scheme would be
         if the principal could observe the cost functions. In this case the principal
         has full information so the solution would be essentially the target-output
         case examined earlier. The principal would simply maximize total output
                             +
         minus total cost x1 xz - cl (XI)- c2 (x2). The solution requires c:(xf) = 1
         for t = 1,2. The principal would then make a payment to each agent that
         just satisfied that agent's reservation utility, so that st - ct(xf) = 0.
            This is depicted in Figure 25.4. Here we have plotted marginal cost on the
         vertical axis and output on the horizontal axis. Agent t produces xf , where
         c',(xf) = 1. A principal who was able to perfectly discriminate between the
         two agents would simply require agent t to produce output xf by presenting
         him with a target output scheme like that outlined earlier; i.e., agent t
         would get a payment such that st(x*) = ct(x;) and st(x) < ct(x) for all
         other values of x.
            This would mean that each agent would have their total surplus ex-
         tracted. In terms of the diagram, agent 1 would receive a payment of
           +
         A B which is just equal to his total cost of production; similarly, agent 2
         would receive A + D which is equal to his total cost.
            The problem with this scheme is that it doesn't satisfy incentive com-
         patibility. If the high-cost agent just satisfies his participation constraint,
         the low-cost agent would necessarily prefer (sz, xz) to (sl, 2;). In symbols,




         since c1(x) < c ~ ( x )for any x. In terms of the diagram, the low-cost agent
         could pretend to be the high-cost agent and produce only x;. This would
         leave him with a surplus of D.


          MARGINAL
             COST    I




                                                   OUTPUT
                              4         x:

Figure         Principal-agent problem with hidden information. In
25.4           the first-best scheme, agent 1 produces x; and agent 2 produces
               x; .
                                      HIDDEN INFORMATION: MONOPOLY       459


   One solution to this problem is simply to change the payments. Suppose
                                                  +
that we pay A if the output is x;, but pay A D if the output is xi.
This leaves the low-cost agent with a net surplus of D, which makes him
indifferent between producing x i and x;.
   This is certainly a feasible plan, but is it optimal from the viewpoint of
the principal? The answer is no, and there is an interesting reason why.
Suppose that we reduce the high-cost agent's target output slightly. Since
he is operating where price equals marginal cost, there is only a first-order
reduction in profits: the reduction in output produced is just balanced by
the reduction in the amount that we have to pay agent 2.
   But since x2 and the area D are both smaller, the surplus that the low-
cost agent would receive from producing at 2 2 is now less. By making
the high-cost agent produce less, and paying him less, we make his target
output less attractive to the low-cost agent. This is more than a first-order
effect, since the low-cost agent is operating at a point where his marginal
cost is less than 1.
   This is illustrated in Figure 25.5. A reduction in the target output for
the high-cost agent reduces profits received from the high-cost agent by the
area AC, but increases profits from the low-cost agent by the area AD.
Hence the principal will find it profitable to reduce the target output for
the high-cost agent to some amount below the efficient level. By paying
the high-cost agent less, the principal reduces the amount that he has to
pay the low-cost agent.

 MARGINAL
    msT     1




                A   I          I
                         1     II

                                         OUTPUT
                        x;    x;

     Increasing profits. By cutting the target output for the high-             Figure
     cost agent by a small amount, the principal can increase his               25.5
     profits.



  In order to say more about the structure of the incentive scheme, it is
convenient to formulate the problem algebraically.
460 INFORMATION (Ch. 25)


   As the geometric analysis indicates, the basic incentive problem is that
the low-cost agent may try to "pretend" that he is a high-cost agent. If xl
is the output that agent 1 is supposed to choose, then the principal must
structure the payment plan so that agent 1's utility from choosing XI is
higher than his utility from choosing 2 2 , and similarly for agent 2. These
are simply a particular form of the incentive compatibility conditions which
are called self-selection constraints in this context.
   Given these observations we can write down the principal's optimization
problem:



                    such that sl - cl (XI) L 0                           (25.15)
                                s2 - ~ ~ ( 222 0)                        (25.16)
                                31 - CI (XI) 2 S2 - C1(~2)               (25.17)
                                s 2 - ~ 2 ( ~L
                                             2 )31 - ~ 2 ( ~ 1 ) .       (25.18)

The first two constraints are the participation constraints. The second two
constraints are the incentive compatibility or self-selection constraints. The
optimal incentive plan (x;, s;, x;, s;) is the solution to this maximization
problem.
  The first observation about this problem comes from rearranging the
self-selection constraints:




These inequalities indicate that if the self-selection constraints are satisfied,



The single-crossing condition implies that agent 2 has a uniformly higher
marginal cost than agent 1. If x2 > xl, this would contradict (25.21).
Hence it must be that in the optimal solution 2 2 1 X I , which means that
the low-cost agent produces at least as much as the high-cost agent.
  Now look at constraints (25.15) and (25.17). These can be rewritten as




Since the principal wants sl to be as small as possible, at most one of these
two constraints will be binding. From constraint (25.16) and the properties
of the cost function, we see that
                                              HIDDEN INFORMATION:MONOPOLY                461


Hence the bracketed expression in equation (25.17') is positive and (25.15')
cannot be binding. It follows that



In the same manner, exactly one of constraints (25.16) and (25.18) will be
binding. Can it be that (25.18) will be satisfied as an equality? In this
case we can substitute equation (25.22) into (25.18) to find



Rearranging, we have



which violates the single-crossing condition. It follows that the optimal
policy must involve
                               S2 = ~ 2 ( 5 2 ) .                  (25.23)
   Without even examining the actual optimization problem, we see that the
nature of the constraints and the objective function themselves establish
two important properties: the high-cost agent receives a payment that
just makes him indifferent to participating, and the low-cost agent receives
a surplus. The low-cost agent's surplus is just the amount necessary to
discourage him from pretending to be a high-cost agent.
   In order to determine the optimal actions, we substitute for s l and s2
from (25.22)- (25.23)and write the principal's maximization problem as

                                              +
         max 7r1 [ X I - c l ( x 1 ) - ~ ~ ( 2 2 ci) (Q)]
         21 4 2
                                                            +         -
                                                                7r2[~2 ~ 2 ( ~ 2 ) ] .


The first-order conditions for this problem are




We can rewrite these conditions as




The first equation implies that the low-cost agent produces the same level
of output that he would if he were the only type present; i.e., the Pareto
efficient level of output. Given the single-crossing property, the high-cost
agent produces less output than he would if he were the only agent, since
4 ( x $ )- c : ( x $ ) > 0.
         462 INFORMATION (Ch. 25)


           In order to depict these conditions graphically, suppose for simplicity
         that r1 = 7 ~ 2= +. Then the second equation in (25.24) implies 2c',(x4) =
           +
         1 4(x4). At this point the marginal benefits from reducing 22 a little
         bit just equals the marginal costs. The optimal solution is depicted in
         Figure 25.6. The low-cost agent produces where its marginal benefit equals
         marginal cost; the high-cost agent produces at a point where its marginal
         benefit exceed its marginal cost. The high-cost agent receives a payment
               +
         of A D which extracts all of its surplus; the low-cost agent receives a
                             + +
         payment of A B D which makes him just indifferent to pretending to
         be the high-cost agent.

          MARGINAL
             COST




                                         II


                         G             x:
                                                  OUTPUT


Figure         Optimal contracts. The high-cost agent produces at xl and
25.6           the low-cost agent at x!. The high-cost agent receives payment
                     +
               A D, and the low-cost agent receives payment A B + D.+


            Figure 25.7 provides another picture of the optimal incentive contract.
         In this diagram we depict the contracts in (s, x) space. A worker of type t
         has a utility function of the form ut = st - ct(xt). Hence, his indifference
                                         +
         curves are of the form st = ut ct(xt).By the single-crossing property the
         high-cost agent's indifference curves are always steeper than the low-cost
         agent's.
            We know that the high-cost worker receives his reservation level of zero
         utility in equilibrium. This fixes the indifference curve and all incentive
         contracts (s2,x2) for the high-cost worker must lie on the zero utility indif-
         ference curve. The firm makes a profit on a worker of type t of Pt= xt -st.
         Hence the isoprofit lines have the form st = st- Pt.These are parallel
         straight lines with slope of +1 and vertical intercept of -Pt. The total
                                     +
         profits of the firm are r l P l r2P2. Note that profits increase as the profit
         line moves down to the southeast and the agent's utility increases as the
         indifference curves move up towards the northwest.
                                      HIDDEN INFORMATION: MONOPOLY       463


   We know from conditions (25.24) that the low-cost worker must satisfy
the condition that ci (2;)= 1. This means that the isoprofit function must
be tangent to the low-cost agent's indifference curve. We also know that
4 ( x z ) < 1, so the isoprofit line cuts the high-cost worker's indifference
curve.
   If the low-cost worker were not present, the principal would want the
high-cost worker to work more, and the high-cost worker would want to do
so. The shaded area in Figure 25.7 depicts the region in which both the
high-cost worker and the principal could be made better off. But since the
low-cost worker is present, increasing the output of the high-cost worker
increases the amount that the firm has to pay the low-cost worker. In
equilibrium the gains from making P2 larger by reducing x2 and s2 are just
counterbalanced by the decrease in PI.




     Optimal incentive contracts. The profits of the firm are                   Figure
           +
     T IPI n2P2. The shaded area represents the inefficient use of              25.7
     the high-cost worker induced by the self-selection constraints.


   It is this negative externality between the high-cost and the low-cost
worker that leads to an inefficient equilibrium. If the monopolist were able
to discriminate and offer each type of worker a distinct wage, the outcome
would be fully efficient. This is analogous to the case of second degree
price discrimination discussed in Chapter 14, page 244. In that model
if there is only one type of consumer, the monopolist will perfectly price
discriminate and make only one take-it-or-leave it offer. But if there are
464 INFORMATION (Ch. 25)


several types of consumers, the attempt to price discriminate will generally
lead to inefficient outcomes.


25.7 Market equilibrium: hidden information
As usual, we can analyze the competitive equilibrium by adding a zero-
profit condition to the model and reinterpreting the reservation utilities.
As more firms enter the market, they bid up the wages of the workers
and reduce the profits of the representative firm. In the monopoly prob-
lem the reservation prices determine the level of profit; in the competitive
equilibrium the zero-profit condition determines the workers' utilities.
   This can be seen from examining Figure 25.7. Under monopoly, the
indifference curve for the high-cost agent determines the profits of the firm,
     +
r1Pl 7r2 P2. Under competition, the profits of the firm are forced to zero,
and the agents move to higher indifference curves.
   We will only examine symmetric equilibria, in which all firms offer the
same set of contracts. There appear to be several possibilities for equilib-
rium.

  (a) The representative firm offers a single contract that attracts both
  types of workers.

  (b) The representative firm offers a single contract that attracts only one
  type of worker.

  ( c ) The representative firm offers two contracts, one for each type of
  worker.

   The case where both types of workers accept a single contract is known
as a pooling equilibrium. The other case, where workers of different
types accept different contracts is called a separating equilibrium.
   We depict some possible equilibrium configurations in Figure 25.8. It is
not hard to see it cannot be an equilibrium to offer only one type of con-
tract, which rules out the pooling equilibrium of type (a) or the separating
equilibrium of (b). If the representative firm is making zero profits, it must
operate on the forty-five degree line in Figure 25.8A. If it offers only one
contract, such as ( s * , x * ) ,this must be optimal for one of the two types;
suppose that it is optimal for the low-cost type. But then a deviant firm
could offer a contract in the shaded area which is preferred by the high-cost
type and makes positive profits. The argument is similar if the contract is
optimal for the high-cost type.
   It follows that as long as both agents receive at least their reservation
level of utility, the only possible equilibrium in this model is the separating
equilibrium depicted in Figure 25.8B. The firm pays each worker the full
value of his output and earns zero profits.
                              MARKET EQUILIBRIUM: HIDDEN INFORMATION       465




     Possible equilibrium configurations. Panel A cannot be                       Figure
     an equilibrium by the arguments given in the text. The only                  25.8
     possibility is case B, where each worker receives his marginal
     product.



EXAMPLE: An algebraic example

It is helpful to spell out the differences between the monopoly and the
competitive hidden-information model algebraically. Suppose that ct(xt) =
tx,2/2 and T I = 7r2 = i. Then the optimal solution for the monopolist is
determined by equations (25.22)) (25.23), and (25.24). You should verify
that these equations have the solution




The profits of the monopolist are




In the monopoly model the high-cost worker just receives his reservation
level of utility, which is zero. In the competitive model, the utility received
by the agents increases as firms bid up the wages.
466 INFORMATION (Ch. 25)


  We've seen that the competitive equilibrium involves a linear wage, so
that a worker of type t wants to maximize xt - ct(xt). This gives us xl = 1
and x2 = 112. The firm earns zero profits, so we must have sl = xl = 1
and 82 = 2 2 = 112 as well. The low-cost agent has a surplus of 112, and
the high-cost agent has a surplus of 114.

25.8 Adverse selection

Consider a variant on the model described in the last section. Assume that
the workers have different productivities in addition to having different
cost functions. High-cost workers produce ~ 2 x 2units of output, while low-
cost workers produce ~ 1 x 1 .We assume that vl > v2, so that the low-cost
workers are attractive for two reasons: they are more productive and they
have lower cost.
   What do equilibrium wage contracts look like now? As in the last sec-
tion there are two logical possibilities for a symmetric equilibrium. Either
the firms offer a single contract (s*,x*) to all workers or they offer two
contracts (ST, xi), (sf,x;). If only a single contract is offered, we call this
a pooling equilibrium, and if two types are offered we call this a separating
equilibrium.
   Consider first the pooling equilibrium. Here all workers are getting the
same compensation even though some are more productive than others.
Since profits overall are zero, the firm must be making positive profits on
the low-cost workers and negative profits on the high-cost workers. The
total value of output produced, (rlvl+r2v2)x*,equals the total cost, rls*+
                                                                    +
r2s* = S*. Hence (s*,x*) must lie on the straight line s = (rlvl r2v2)x,
whose slope is the weighted average of the productivities of the two types
of agents, as illustrated in Figure 25.9.
   The proposed pooling equilibrium is some point on this line. At any such
point, draw the indifference curves for the two types of agents through this
point. By assumption the indifference curve for the more-productive agent
is flatter than the indifference curve for the less-productive agent. This
means that there is some contract in the shaded area that is better for
the high-productivity agents and worse for the low-productivity agents. A
deviant firm could offer such a contract, and attract only high-productivity
agents, thereby making a positive profit. Since this construction can be car-
ried out at any point on the zero-profit line, no pooling equilibrium exists.
   The remaining possibility is a separating equilibrium. Figure 25.10 de-
picts an example of both efficient and equilibrium contracts. The con-
tracts (s:,x:) and (sf,xf) are the (full-information) efficient contracts,
but they don't satisfy the self-selection constraints: the low-productivity
agent prefers the contract targeted for the high-productivity agent. A firm
might offer (sz,x f ) hoping to attract only the low-cost, high-productivity
workers. But this firm would experience adverse selection-both types
of workers would find this contract attractive.
                                                     ADVERSE SELECTION    467




     Pooling cannot be an equilibrium. If only a single con-                     Figure
     tract is offered, it must be along the zero-profit line. Draw the           25.10
     indifference curves through such a contract and note that since
     the less-productive workers have steeper indifference curves, it
     is always possible to find a contract in the shaded area that
     attracts only high-productivity workers, and therefore makes a
     positive profit.




   The solution to this adverse selection problem is to move up the zero-
profit line for high-productivity workers to a point like (si,x',). Now
(si, xi) and (sl, xl) is an equilibrium configuration of contracts: the low-
productivity agent is just indifferent between his contract and that of the
high-productivity agent. Anything above either agent's indifference curve
isn't profitable for the firms, and we have an equilibrium.
   However, it can also happen that no equilibrium exists. Note that the
indifference curve through (si, xi) must by construction cut the zero profit
line. It follows that there will be some region like the shaded region in
Figure 25.10 that is preferred by both the firm and the high-productivity
workers. No contracts are offered in this area because they would attract
low-productivity workers as well and therefore be unprofitable-we know
such contracts are unprofitable since the zero-profit line in Figure 25.10 for
the pooled workers lies below the shaded region.
   But suppose that there are a lot of high-productivity workers so that the
              +
line s = ?rlvl ~ 2 ~    intersected
                             2      the shaded region. In this case, offering
a pooled contract in this region would be profitable. Hence the proposed
separating equilibrium could be broken, and no pure-strategy equilibrium
exists.
468 INFORMATION (Ch. 25)




      Separating equilibrium. The contracts (s; , x;) and (sl, xl)                    Figure
      are efficient, but they don't satisfy the self-selection constraints.           25.10
      The contracts (sz, xz) and (si,xi) do satisfy self-selection.



25.9 The lemons market and adverse selection

Here is another model that illustrates the possibility of nonexistence of
equilibrium due to adverse selection. Consider the market for used cars.
The current owner of a car presumably has better information about its
quality than does a potential buyer. To the extent that buyers realize this,
they may be reluctant to purchase a product that is offered for sale, because
they (correctly) fear getting stuck with a lemon. If this car is so good, why
is it being sold, the buyers may ask? The used-car market cars may be
thin despite the presence of many potential buyers and sellers.
   This simple intuition was formalized in a striking way by Akerlof (1970)
in his lemons market. Suppose that we can index the quality of a used
car by some number q, which is distributed uniformly over the interval
[O, I]. For later use, we will note that if q is uniformly distributed over the
interval [0, b ] , the average value of q will be b / 2 . Hence the average quality
available in the market is 112.
   There is a large number of demanders for used cars who are willing to
pay $q for a car of quality q, and there are a large number of sellers who
are each willing to sell a car of quality q for a price of q. Hence, if quality
were observable, each used car of quality q would be sold at some price
                                                                SIGNALING    469


between   gq  and q.
   However, suppose that quality is not observable. Then it is sensible for
the buyers of used cars to attempt to estimate the quality of a car offered to
them by considering the average quality of the cars offered in the market.
We assume that the average quality can be observed, although the quality
of any given car cannot be observed. Thus the willingness to pay for a used
car will be Zij.
   What will be the equilibrium price in this market? Assume that the
equilibrium price is some number p > 0. Then all owners of cars with
quality less than p will want to offer their cars for sale, since for those
owners, p is greater than their reservation price. Since quality is uniformly
distributed over the interval [O,p],the average quality of a car offered for
sale will be ij = p / 2 . Substituting this into the formula for the reservation
price of a buyer, we see that a buyer would be willing to pay %ij=      5 ip.
                                                                          =
This is less than p, the price at which we assumed a used car would be sold.
Hence, no cars will be sold at the price p. Since the price p was arbitrary,
we have shown that no used cars will be sold at any positive price. The
only equilibrium price in this market is p = 0. At this price demand is zero
and supply is zero: the asymmetric information between buyers and sellers
has destroyed the market for used cars!
   Any price that is attractive to the owners of good cars is even more
attractive to owners of lemons. The selection of cars offered to the market
is not a representative selection, but is biased towards the lemons. This is
another example of adverse selection.


25.10 Signaling

In the last section we indicated how problems with hidden information
could result in equilibria with adverse selection. In the lemons market too
little trade takes place because the high-quality goods cannot be easily
distinguished from the low-quality goods. In the labor market, the efficient
set of contracts is not viable because the low-productivity workers would
want to choose the contract appropriate for the high-productivity workers.
   In the lemons market the sellers of good cars would like to signal that
they are offering a good car rather than a lemon. One possibility would
be to offer a w a r r a n t e e t h e owners of good cars would certify that they
would cover the costs of any breakdowns for some time period. In effect,
the sellers of the good cars would offer to insure the buyers of their cars.
   In order to be consistent with equilibrium, the signal must be such that
the owners of good cars could afford to offer it and the owners of lemons
could not. Such a signal will allow the owners of good cars to "prove" to the
potential buyers that they really have a good car. Offering the warrantee
is a costly activity for the sellers of lemons, but not very costly for the
sellers of good cars. Hence, this signal allows the buyers to discriminate
470 INFORMATION (Ch. 25)

between the two types of cars. In this case, the presence of a signal allows
the market to function more effectively than it would otherwise. This need
not always be the case, as we will see below.


25.1 1 Educational signaling

Let us return to the labor market example, with two types of workers who
have productivity v2 and vl. Suppose that the hours worked by each type
are fixed. If there are no ways to discriminate between the more-productive
and less-productive workers, the workers will simply receive the average of
their productivities in competitive equilibrium. This gives them a wage of



  The more-productive workers are getting paid less than their marginal
product; the less-productive workers are getting paid more than their mar-
ginal product. The more-productive workers would like a way to signal
that they are more productive than the others.
  Suppose that there is some signal that is easier to acquire by the more-
productive workers than the less-productive workers. One nice example is
education-it is plausible that it is cheaper for the more-productive workers
to acquire education than the less-productive workers. To be explicit, let
us suppose that the cost to acquiring e years of education is c2e for the
more productive workers and cle for the less productive workers, and that
Cl   > C2.
   Let us suppose that education has no effect on productivity. However,
firms may still find it profitable to base wages on education since they
may attract a higher-quality work force. Suppose that workers believe
that firms will pay a wage s ( e ) where s is some increasing function of e .
A signaling equilibrium will be a conjectured wage profile by the workers
that is actually confirmed by the firms' behavior.
   Let el and e2 be the education levels actually chosen by the workers.
Then a separating signaling equilibrium has t o satisfy the zero-profit con-
ditions
                                 s(e1) = vl


and the self-selection conditions




In general there may be many functions s ( e ) that satisfy these conditions.
We will content ourselves with exhibiting one such function.
                                                                Exercises   471


  Let e* be some number such that



Suppose that the wage function conjectured by the workers is

                                   v2   for e > e*
                          s(e) =
                                   v1   for e 5 e*

It is trivial to show that this satisfies the self-selection constraints, and
hence is a wage profile consistent with equilibrium.
   Note that this signaling equilibrium is wasteful in a social sense. There
is no social gain to education since it doesn't change productivity. Its only
role is t o distinguish more-productive from less-productive workers.


Notes

The two-action case discussed above is simple, but it contains much of
the insight present in the case involving many actions. For a general
survey of this and other issues in the principal-agent literature see Hart
& Holmstrom (1987). Signaling was first introduced in economics by
Spence (1974). Akerlof (1970) first examined the lemons market. See
Rothschild & Stiglitz (1976) for a model of market equilibrium with adverse
selection. See Kreps (1990) for a more detailed discussion of equilibrium
in models involving asymmetric information.


Exercises

25.1. Consider the hidden action principal-agent problem described in the
text and let f = u-l. Assume that U(S) is increasing and concave, show
that f is an increasing, convex function.

25.2. Let V(ca,cb) be the utility received by the principal using the op-
timal incentive scheme when the costs of actions a and b are c, and cb,
respectively. Derive an expression for dV/dc, and dV/dcb in terms of the
parameters appearing in the fundamental condition, and use these expres-
sions t o interpret those parameters.

25.3. Suppose that c, = cb. What form would the optimal incentive scheme
take?

25.4. Suppose in the principal-agent problem that cb decreases while all
other parameters remain constant. Show that the agent must be a t least
as well off.
472 INFORMATION (Ch. 25)


25.5. Suppose that in the hidden action principal-agent problem the agent
is risk neutral. Show that the first-best outcome can be achieved.

25.6. Consider the monopoly version of the hidden information problem.
Suppose that both agents have the same cost function but different reser-
vation levels of utility. How does the analysis change?

25.7. Prove the following implication of the single-crossing property: If
cL(x) > c i ( x ) for all x , then for any two distinct levels of output X I and
2 2 , for which x2 > X I , we must have ~ ~ ( 2-2 C) Z ( X I ) > C I ( 2 2 ) - C I ( X I ) .

25.8. In the text it was claimed that if c 2 ( x )> cl ( x ) and c;(x) > c i ( x ) then
any two indifference curves from a type 1 and a type 2 agent intersected at
most once. Prove this.

25.9. Consider the competitive equilibrium in the hidden information model
described in the text. If the reservation utility of the high-cost agents is
high enough, equilibrium may exist in which only the low-cost agents are
employed. For what values of ii2will this occur?

25.10. Professor P has hired a teaching assistant, Mr A. Professor P cares
about how many hours that Mr. A teaches and about how much she has t o
pay him. Professor P wants t o maximize her payoff function, x - s, where
x is the number of hours taught by Mr. A and s is the total wages she pays
him. If Mr. A teaches for x hours and is paid s, his utility is s - c ( x ) where
c ( x )= x 2 / 2 . Mr. A's reservation utility is zero.

  (a) If Professor P chooses x and s to maximize her utility subject to the
constraint that Mr. A is willing t o work for her, how much teaching will
Mr. A be doing?

  (b) How much will Professor P have to pay Mr. A t o get him t o do this
amount of teaching?

    (c) Suppose that Professor P uses a scheme of the following kind t o
get Mr. A to work for her. Professor P sets a wage schedule of the form
            +
s ( x ) = ax b and lets Mr. A choose the number of hours that he wants t o
work. What values of a and b should Professor P choose so as t o maximize
her payoff function? Could Professor P achieve a higher payoff if she were
able to use a wage schedule of more general functional form?
                      CHAPTER             26

        MATHEMATICS


This chapter provides concise descriptions of most of*the mathematical
tools used in the text. If you forget the definition of some term, or some
important property, you can look here. It is not appropriate for learning
the concepts initially. For recommended texts for learning, consult the
notes a t the end of the chapter.


26.1 Linear algebra

We denote the set of all n-tuples of real numbers by R n . The set of n-tuples
of nonnegative real numbers is denoted by Rn+. The elements of these sets
will be referred to as points or vectors. Vectors will be indicated by
boldface type. If x = ( x l , . . . , x,) is a vector, we denote then its ith
component is x,.
   We can add two vectors by adding their components: x y = (XI +           +
          +
y1,. . . , x, y,). We can perform scalar multiplication on a vector by
multiplying every component by a fixed real number t: t x = (txl, . . . , tx,).
Geometrically, vector addition is done by drawing x and translating y to
         474 MATHEMATICS (Ch. 26)


         the tail of x; scalar multiplication is done by drawing a vector t times as
         long as the original.
            A vector x is a linear combination of a set of n vectors A if x =
         xy=l   tiyi, where yi E A and the ti's are scalars. A set A of n vectors
         is linearly independent if there is no set (ti, xi), with some ti # 0 and
         xi E A,such that  xy=l   tixi = 0. An equivalent definition is that no vector
         in A can be represented as a linear combination of vectors in A.
            Given two vectors their inner product is given by x y =     xi  xiyi. The
         norm of a vector x is denoted by 1x1 and defined by 1x1 = 6.       Note that
         by the Pythagorean theorem, the norm of x is the distance of the point x
         from the origin; that is, it is the length of the vector x.
            There is a very important geometric interpretation of the inner product,
         illustrated in Figure 26.1. We have two vectors x and y; the dotted line
         is dropped from the head of y to x and is perpendicular to x. The vector
         which extends from the origin to the point where the dotted line intersects
         x is called the projection of y on x. Certainly the projection of y on x is
         a vector of form tx. Let us use the Pythagorean formula to calculate t:


                                t2xx   + (y - tx)(y - tx) = yy
                                                     txx = x y
                                                        t = - .XY
                                                             XX

         Hence, if we project y on x we get a vector that points in the same direction
         as x but is only xy/xx as long as x. If x y = 0,then x and y are said to
         be orthogonal.




Figure        The projection of y on x. This illustrates the geometric
26.1          interpretation the projection operation.
                                      DEFINITE AND SEMIDEFINITEMATRICES    475


   Let 8 be the angle between x and y. It is clear from elementary trigonom-
etry that t 1x1 = ( y 1 cos 8. If we combine this with our other formula for t,
we see that x y = (x((y(cos8.Hence if 8 = 90°, x y = 0; if 8 > 90°, then
x y < 0 and if 0 < 90°,then xy > 0.
   We can consider maps from R n to R m that send vectors into vectors.
We denote such maps by f: Rn + R m . A map is a linear function if
     +               +
f(tx sy) = tf(x) sf(y) for all scalars s and t and vectors x and y.
If f is a linear function to R', we call it a linear functional. If p is
a linear functional we can represent it by a vector p = (PI,. . . ,pn), and
write p(x) = px. A set of points of form H(p, a) = {x : px =a) is called
a hyperplane.
   The hyperplane H(p, 0) consists of all vectors x that are orthogonal to
the vector p. It is not hard to see that this is an n - 1 dimensional set. The
hyperplanes of the form H ( p , a) are translations of this basic hyperplane.
Hyperplanes are important in economics since H(p, a) consists of all vectors
x that have value a at prices p.
   If A is a linear function A: R n + R m , we can represent A by an m-by-n
matrix A = (aij). Then A(x) = Ax; i.e., to find the image of x under
the map A we just apply ordinary matrix multiplication. A symmetric
matrix has aij = aji for all i and j.
   We follow the following convention for inequality comparisons of vectors:
x 2 y means xi 2 yi for all i, x >> y means xi > yi for all i.


26.2 Definite and semidefinite matrices
Let A be a symmetric square matrix. Then if we postmultiply A by some
vector x and premultiply it by the (transpose of the) same vector x, we
have a quadratic form. For example,



  Suppose that A is the identity matrix. In this case it is not hard to
see that whatever the values of X I and 2 2 , the quadratic form must be
nonnegative. In fact, if xl and 2 2 are not both zero, x A x will be strictly
positive. The identity matrix is an example of a positive definite matrix.

Definite matrices.       A square matrix A is:

  (a) positive definite if x t Ax > 0 for all x # 0;
  (b) negative definite if x t Ax < 0 for all x # 0;
  (c) positive semidefinite i f x t A x 2 0 for all x;
  (d) negative semidefinite if xtA x 5 0 for all x.

  In some cases we do not want to require that x t Ax has a definite sign
for all values of x, but only for some restricted set of values. We say A
476 MATHEMATICS (Ch 26)


is positive definite subject to constraint bx = 0 if x tAx > 0 for all
x # 0 such that bx = 0. The other definitions extend to the constrained
case in a natural manner.


Tests for definite matrices

It is often convenient to be able to recognize when a matrix is negative
or positive semidefinite. One useful necessary condition is as follows: if
a matrix is positive semidefinite, then it must have nonnegative diagonal
terms. The proof is simply to note that if x = (1,0,. . . , O), for example,
then xtAx = a l l .
   Conditions that are necessary and sufficient take a more complicated
form. The minor matrices of a matrix A are the matrices formed by
eliminating k columns and the same numbered k rows. The naturally or-
dered or nested principal minor matrices of A are the minor matrices
given by




and so on. The minor determinants or minors of a matrix are the
determinants of the minors. We denote the determinant of a matrix A by
det A or IAI.
  Suppose that we are given a square matrix A and a vector b. We can
border A by b in the following way:




This matrix is called the bordered matrix. The useful generalization
of this to the minor matrices is called the border-preserving principal
minor matrices. These are just the submatrices of this matrix, starting in
the upper left-hand corner zncludzng the border elements. It turns out that
the determinants of these submatrices give a convenient test for whether
the matrix is positive or negative definite.

Tests for definite matrices.      A square m a t n x A zs:

  (a) positive definite zf and only zf the prznczpal mznor detemznants
  are all posztzve;

  (b) negative definite zf and only zf the pnnczpal mznor detemznants
  of order k have szgn ( - I ) ~ for k = 1, . . . , n.
                                                                           ANALYSIS     477


  (c) p o s i t i v e d e f i n i t e s u b j e c t t o the constraznt bx = 0 zf and only if
  the border-preserving principal minors are all negatzve;

  (d) n e g a t i v e d e f i n i t e s u b j e c t t o the constraznt bx = 0 zf and only zf
  the border-preservzng pnncipal minors have szgn (- 1 ) for lc = 2, . . . , n.

   Note well the peculiar fact that a positive definite matrix has all pos-
itive principal minors, while a matrix that is positive definite subject t o
constraint has all border-preserving principal minors negative. See Chap-
ter 27, page 500, for some examples.

Corollary. I n the cases described above, if the naturally ordered pnnczpal
mznors satzsfy one of the conditzons (a)- (d), then all of the principal minors
satzsfy the appropnate condztzon. Hence checkzng the naturally ordered
pnnczpal minors zs suficzent for the tests.



26.3 Cramer's rule

Here is a convenient rule for solving linear systems of equations of the form




We can write his system more conveniently as Ax = b.

C r a m e r ' s rule. To find the component x , of the solutzon vector to thzs
system of lznear equatzons, replace the z t h column of the matrzx A wzth the
column vector b to form a matrzx A,. Then x, 2s the determznant of A,
divided by the determznant of A :




26.4 Analysis

Given a vector x in R n and a positive real number e , we define an o p e n
ball of radius e a t x as B,(x) = {y E Rn : ly - xl < e ) . A set of points
A is a o p e n s e t if for every x in A there is some B,(x) which is contained
in A. If x is in an arbitrary set and there exists an e > 0 such that B,(x)
is in A, then x is said to be in the i n t e r i o r of A.
478 MATHEMATICS (Ch. 26)


   The complement of a set A in R n consists of all the points in R n that
are not in A; it is denoted by R n \A.
   A set is a closed set if R n \A is an open set. A set A is bounded if there
is some x in A and some e > 0 such that A is contained in B,(x). If a
nonempty set in R n is both closed and bounded, it is called compact.
   A infinite sequence in R n , ( x i ) = ( x 1 , x 2 ,.. .) is just an infinite set
of points, one point for each positive integer. A sequence ( x i ) is said to
converge to a point x* if for every e > 0, there is an integer m such that,
for all i > m , x i is in B,(x*). We sometimes say that x i gets arbitrarily
close to x*. We also say that x* is the limit of the sequence (x i ) and
write limi,,    "x     x*. If a sequence converges to a point, we call it a
convergent sequence.

Closed set. A is a closed set zf every convergent sequence in A converges
to a point in A.

Compact set. If A is a compact set, then every sequence in A has a
convergent subsequence.

  A function f ( x )is continuous at x* if for every sequence ( x i ) that con-
verges to x*, we have the sequence ( f ( x i ) )converging to f ( x * ) . A function
that is continuous a t every point in its domain is called a continuous
function.


26.5 Calculus

Calculus is a way of tying linear algebra and analysis together by approx-
imating certain functions by linear functions. Given a function f : R + R,
we define its derivative at a point x* by




if that limit exists. The derivative df ( x * ) / d xis also denoted by f l ( x * ) . If
the derivative of f exists at x*, we say that f is differentiable a t x*.
   Consider the linear function F ( t ) defined by

                               F ( t )= f ( x * ) + f (x*)t.
                                                        l




This is a good approximation to f near x* since


        lim
              f (x* + t ) - F ( t )
                                      = lim
                                                    +
                                              f (x* t ) - f ( x * )- f l ( x * ) t
                                                                                     = 0.
        t-0            t                t-0                   t
                                                                 CALCULUS   479


   In the same way, given an arbitrary function f: Rn -, R m , we can define
its derivative at x*, Df(x*), as being that linear map from Rn to R m that
approximates f close to x* in the sense that

                  lim
                          If(x*   + t ) - f(x*)- Df(x*)tl = 0,
                  Itl+O                    It l
assuming, of course, that such a map exists. We use norm signs since both
                                                                 +
the numerator and denominator are vectors. The map f(x*) Df(x*) is a
good approximation to f at x* in the sense that for small vectors t,

                          f (x*   + t ) = f (x*)+ Df (x*)t.
   Given a function f : R n -, R, we can also define the partial derivatives
off with respect to xi evaluated at x*. To do this, we hold all components
fixed except for the ith component, so that f is only a function of xi, and
calculate the ordinary one-dimensional derivative. We denote the partial
derivative of f with respect to xi evaluated at x* by df (x*)/dxi.
   Since Df(x*) is a linear transformation, we can represent it by a matrix,
which turns out to be



                 Df (x*)



The matrix representing Df (x) is called the Jacobian matrix of f at x*.
We will often work with functions from R n to R in which case Df(x*) will
be an n-by-1 matrix, which is simply a vector.


Higher-order derivatives

If we have a function f : Rn -, R, the Hessian matrix of that function is
the matrix of mixed partial derivatives




Note that D 2f (x) is a symmetric matrix.
  Let f : Rn -t R be a differentiable function and let x and y be two vectors
in R n . Then it can be shown that
480 MATHEMATICS (Ch. 26)


where z and w are points on the line segment between x and y. These
expressions are called Taylor series expansions of f a t x .
  If x and y are close together and the derivative functions are continuous,
then D f (z) and D 2 f ( w ) are approximately equal to D f ( x ) and D~ f ( x ) ,
respectively. We therefore often write the Taylor series expansions as




26.6 Gradients and tangent planes

Consider a function f : Rn + R. The gradient of f a t x* is a vector whose
coordinates are the partial derivatives of f at x*:




  The gradient of f at x* has the same representation as the derivative of
f at x* but they are conceptually somewhat different. The derivative is
a linear functional on R n ; the gradient is a vector in Rn. As it happens,
linear functionals can be represented by vectors so they "look" the same,
even though they are really different objects. However, we will exploit
appearances and use the same notation for each.
   There is an important geometric interpretation of the gradient: it points
in the direction that the function f increases most rapidly. To see this, let
h be a vector of norm 1. The derivative of f in the direction h at x* is
simply D f ( x * ) h .Using the formula for the inner product,




and this is clearly maximized when 6 = 0, i.e., when the vectors D f ( x * )
and h are collinear.
    The level set of a function is the set of all x such that the function is
constant: &(a) = { x : f ( x ) = a ) . The level set of a differentiable function
 f : Rn + R will generally be an n - 1 dimensional surface.
   The upper contour set of a function f : Rn -t R is the set of all x such
that f (x) is at least as large as some number: U ( a )= { x E Rn : f ( x ) 2 a ) .
   It is often convenient to find a formula for the tangent hyperplane
to the level set at some point x * . We know that the linear map f ( x * )     +
D f ( x * ) ( x- x * ) closely approximates the map f near x*. Hence, the best
linear approximation t o ( x : f ( x ) = a ) should be H ( a ) = {x: f ( x * ) +
                                                  HOMOGENEOUS FUNCTIONS        481


Df ( x * ) ( x
             - x*)= a). Since f ( x * )= a, we have the following formula for
the tangent hyperplane:

                      H ( a ) = { x :D f ( x * ) ( x
                                                   - x*)= 0 ) .             (26.1)

Hyperplane. If x is a vector in the tangent hyperplane, then x - x* is
orthogonal to the gradient of f at x*.

  This follows directly from equation 26.1 but is also quite intuitive. Along
the surface Q(a) the value of the function f is constant. Therefore the
derivative of f (x) in those directions should be zero.


26.7 Limits
At a couple of points in the text we use L'HBpital's rule for computing
limits. Suppose that we are trying to compute the limit of a fraction
 f ( x ) / g ( x )as x + 0, but f ( 0 ) = g(0) = 0, so the value of the fraction at
x = 0 is undefined. However, if f and g are differentiable, and if gl(0) # 0 ,
L'H6pital's rule says that

                                   f(x) -
                               lim -      - f1(0)
                                            -
                               2-0 9 ( x > g1(0)'
Hence, the limit of the ratio is the ratio of the derivatives.


26.8 Homogeneous functions
A function f : R"+ R is homogeneous of degree k iff (tx)= t k f ( x )for
all t > 0. The two most important cases are where k = 0 and k = 1. If we
double all the arguments of a function that is homogeneous of degree zero,
the value of the function doesn't change. If the function is homogeneous of
degree 1, the value of the function doubles.

Euler's law.       If f is a differentiable function that is homogeneous of
degree 1, then




   By way of proof, we note that by definition, f (tx) = t f ( x ) . Differenti-
ating this identity with respect to t , we have

                             C mxi
                               a(tx,)
                                      = f (x).
                              i

Setting t = 1 gives us the result.
482 MATHEMATICS (Ch. 26)


Homogeneity. I f f ( x ) is homogeneous of degree k 2 1, then d f ( x ) / d x i
is homogeneous of degree k - 1.

   To see this, differentiate the identity f ( t x ) = t k f ( x ) with respect to xi:




Dividing both sides by t yields the desired result.
  An important implication of this fact is that the slopes of the level sur-
faces of a homogeneous function are constant along rays through the origin:




for all t > 0.
   However, there are nonhomogeneous functions that have this same p r o p
erty. A function is called homothetic if it is a positive monotonic transfor-
mation of a function that is homogeneous of degree 1. That is, a homothetic
function can be written as f ( x ) = g(h(x))where h ( x ) is homogeneous of
degree 1. It is not hard to show that homothetic functions satisfy condition
(26.2).


26.9 Afine functions

A function is an d n e function if it can be expressed in the form f ( x ) =
  +
a bx. Affine functions are sometimes called linear functions, but, strictly


        -
speaking, this is only correct when a = 0.
  Clearly, a differentiable function is an affine function if and only if
fU(x) 0. Here is a useful implication of this fact: a function satisfies
thecondition f ( p + ( l - p ) v ) = p f ( u ) + ( l - p ) f ( v ) f o r a l l O 5 p 5 l i f a n d
only iff (u) is affine. The proof is simply to differentiate the condition with
                                 +
respect to p to find ff(p ( 1 - p)v)(u- v ) = f ( u )- f ( v ) . Differentiating
                                 +
once more gives us f" (p ( 1 - p)v) = 0.


26.1 0 Convex sets

A set of points A in Rn is convex if x in A and y in A implies t x + ( 1 - t ) y
is in A for all t such that 0 5 t I 1. A set of points in A is strictly convex
if t x + ( 1 - t ) y is in the interior of A for all t such that 0 < t < 1.
  We frequently use the fact that the sum of convex sets is convex, so we
prove that here. Let A1 and Ap be two convex sets, and let A = Al AP.                    +
                                            PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS   483


Let x and y be two points in A. By definition x = xl + x2, where xl is
                                                                  +
in A1 and x2 is in A2, and similarly for y . It follows that t x (1 - t ) y =
     +      +             +             +             +      +
t ( x i x2) (1 - t ) ( y l yn) = [ t x ~ ( 1 - t ) y l ] [tx2 (1 - t)yn].The
bracketed expressions are in Al and A2 respectively since each of these is
                          +
a convex set. Hence t x ( 1 - t ) y is in A, which establishes that A is a
convex set.


26.1 1 Separating hyperplanes

Let A and B be two convex sets in Rn that are disjoint; i.e., that have
an empty intersection. Then it is reasonably intuitive that one can find a
hyperplane that "separates" the two sets. That is, A lies on one side of
the hyperplane and B lies on the other side. This is the content of the
following theorem.

Separating hyperplane t h e o r e m .      If A and B are two nonempty,
disjoint, convex sets in R n , then there exists a lznear functional p such
that px 2 p y for all x in A and y in B .



26.1 2 Partial differential equations

A s y s t e m o f partial differential equations is a system of equations of
the form




The last equation is called the b o u n d a r y condition. General systems of
PDEs can be more complicated than this, but this form is sufficient for our
purposes.
   A solution to a system of PDEs is a function f ( p ) that satisfies the equa-
tions identically in p. A necessary condition for there to exist a solution
to a set of PDEs comes from the symmetry of cross-partial derivatives:




is a necessary condition for a local solution to this set of PDEs to exist.
This condition is known as an integrability condition. (The conditions
484 MATHEMATICS (Ch. 26)


for a solution to exist globally are somewhat more complicated and depend
on the topological properties of the domain.)
  Solving for an explicit solution to a system of PDEs may be quite difficult,
but there is one special case that is easy to handle. This is the case where
f(p) does not appear explicitly on the right-hand side of the equations.
This sort of system can be solved by simple integration.
  Consider, for example, what happens when there are two equations:




If the integrability condition




is satisfied, it can be shown that the solution to this system is given by




   It is clear that this function satisfies the boundary condition, and simple
differentiation shows that d f lap2 = g2(pl, p2). We only need establish
that aflap1 = 91 (PI,~ 2 ) .
  Taking the derivative. we find




Using the integrability condition




26.1 3 Dynamical systems

The state of a system consists of a description of all of the variables that
affect the behavior of the system. The state s p a c e of a system consists
                                                      RANDOM VARIABLES      485


of all feasible states. For example, the state space of a particular economic
system may consist of all possible price configurations, or all possible con-
figurations of prices and consumption bundles.
   If we denote the state space by S, we can describe a dynamical system
by a function F : S x R -+ S. The real line, R, is interpreted as time and
F(x, t) is the state of the system at time t if it was in state x at time 0.
   Usually the state function F is not given explicitly but is given implicitly
by a system of differential equations. For example, x = f(x(t)) is a
differential equation that tells us the rate of change of x when the system is
in stat; x(t). If f(x) satisfies certain regularity conditions, it can be shown
that there is a unique dynamical system defined by f.
   A solution to a system of differential equations x = f(x) is a function
x : R -+ Rn such that x(t) = f(x(t)) for all t. A solution is also called a
solution curve, trajectory, orbit, etc.
   An equilibrium of a dynamical system is a state x* such that f(x*)= 0.
RoughIy speaking, if a dynamicd system ever gets in an equilibrium state,
it stays there forever.
   Suppose that we are given some dynamical system x = f (x) and we start
at time 0 in some arbitrary state 3.It is often of interest to know when
the state of the system will move to some equilibrium x*. We say that a
system is globally stable if limt,,      x(t) = x* for all initial values xo. We
note that a globally stable equilibrium must be unique.
   There is a very convenient criterion for determining when a dynamical
system is globally stable. We will restrict ourselves to the case where the
state space S is compact, so that we know that the system will always stay
in a bounded region. Suppose that we can find a differentiable function
V : S + R that has the following two properties:
  (1) V reaches a minimum at x*;

  (2) ~ ( x ( t ) )< 0 for all x(t) # x*. That is, DV(x)f (x(t)) < 0 for
  x(t) # x*.
  Such a function is called a Liaponov function.
Liaponov's theorem. If we can find a Liaponov function for a dynam-
ical system, then the unique equilibrium x* is globally stable.


26.1 4 Random variables
Given a random variable R, that takes on the value R,, with probability
T,,for s = 1,.. . , S, we define the expectation of that random variable to
486 MATHEMATICS (Ch. 26)


We define the covariance of two random variables R, and ~b by



The variance of a random variable R, is given by



   Let x,, xb, and c be nonstochastic. Then, given the definitions, the
following facts follow by direct computation:

Expectation of a sum. E(X,R,           + xbRb)= z a ~ R+a xbERb= xafZ, +
56%.More generally,




                                                      --
Covariance identity. cov(ka, Rb)= E R ~ R
                                        -~RaRb.
Covariance of a sum. cov(xaR,          + c, Rb)= x,cov(~,, R ~ ) .
Variance_of a sum. var(xa R , + X ~ R ~ + C
                                          =)x ~ v a r ( R a ) + 2 x a x b c o v (
                                                                               Rb)~,
+ X:W(R~) = xiuaa + 2 ~ a x b ~ a+bxE0bb. More generally,



Notes

There are many books on mathematics for economics that cover this ma-
terial in detail. See, for example, Binmore (1982), Binmore (1983), and
Blume & Simon (1991).
                       CHAPTER               27
      OPTIMIZATION

This chapter is meant to serve as a review of various facts about opti-
mization. Typically students will have spent several weeks studying these
methods in a mathematics course prior to studying this text.


27.1 Single variable optimization
Let f : R -+ R be a function. We say that this function achieves a maxi-
m u m at x* if f (x*) > f (x) for all x. If f (x*) > f (x) for all x # x*, then
we say that x* is a strict maximum. Similarly, if f (x*) 5 f (x) for all x,
we say that the function achieves a minimum, and if f (x*) < f (x) for all
x # x*, we have a strict minimum.
  Note that the problem of maximizing f (x) with respect to x is the same
as the problem of minimizing -f (x).


First-order and second-order conditions
Suppose that a differentiable1 function f achieves a maximum at x*. Then

  In this text we will often adopt "Solow's convention:" every function is assumed to
  be differentiable one more time than we need it to be.
488 OPTIMIZATION (Ch. 27)


we know from elementary calculus that the first derivative of f must be
equal to zero at x* and that the second derivative of f must be less than
or equal to zero at x*. These conditions are known as the first-order
condition and the second-order condition, respectively, and they can
be expressed mathematically by:




Note that these are necessary not sufficient conditions; a point in R that
solves the maximization problem must satisfy the conditions, but there may
be points that satisfy the conditions that do not solve the maximization
problem.
  For a minimization problem the first-order condition is the same, but the
second-order condition becomes fl'(x*) 2 0.


EXAMPLE: First- and second-order conditions.

Consider the function f (x, a ) = l n x - ax. The first-order condition for
a maximum with respect to x is that l / x - a = 0, and the second-order
condition is that -1/x 2 5 0. We see that the second-order condition is
automatically satisfied, so it follows that the optimal value of x is x* = l / a .
  Now let g(x, b) = u(x) - bx. In this case we cannot solve explicitly for
the x* that maximizes this expression, but we know that it must satisfy
the two conditions ul(x*)= b and ul'(x*) 5 0.



Concavity

A function of one variable is concave if



                                        <
for all x and y and all t such that 0 t 5 1. See Figure 27.1 for a picture.
A concave function has the property that f evaluated at a weighted average
of x and y is greater than or equal to the same weighted average of f (x)
and f (Y).
                                                                   <
   If f is differentiable, then f is concave if and only if fl'(x) 0 for all x.
For example, In x is a concave function since its second derivative is always
less than or equal to zero.
   A function is s t r i c t l y concave if
                                                    SINGLE VARIABLE OPTIMIZATION   489


for all x and y and all t such that 0 < t < 1. If fI1(x) < 0 for all x , then f
is strictly concave, but the converse is not true. For example, f ( x ) = - x 4
is strictly concave, but fl'(0) = 0.
   Another property of a concave function is that




for all x and y. A linear function grows at a constant rate. Roughly
speaking, a concave function is one that grows less rapidly at each point
than the linear function that is tangent to it at that point.
     If .f is concave, then its second derivative is less than or equal to zero
at every point. If follows that if f l ( x * ) = 0, then x* is a maximum of
the function. The easiest proof of this is just to substitute y = x* and
 f l ( x * ) = 0 in equation (27.1) to find



for all x. But this inequality shows that x* is a maximum value of f .
Hence for concave functions the first-order condition is both necessary and
sufficient.
   A convex function satisfies the property that

                   f (tx   + ( 1 - t ) y ) It f ( X I + ( 1 - t ) f( Y ) .
Note that if f ( x ) is convex, then - f ( x ) is concave. Given this observation
it is easy to establish the following facts.




                                    X                                        X
                  Concave                                         Convex

     Concave and convex functions. A concave function grows                              Figure
     less rapidly than a linear function which is tangent to it at some                  27.1
     point; a convex function grows more rapidly than a linear func-
     tion.
490 OPTIMIZATION (Ch. 27)


  1) If f is a convex function, then f"(x) 2 0 for all x.

  2) If f is a convex function, then




  3) If f is a convex function and fl(x*) = 0, then x* minimizes the
  function f .



The envelope theorem

Suppose that f (x, a) is a function of both x and a. We generally interpret
a as being a parameter determined outside the problem being studied and
x as the variable we wish to study. Suppose that x is chosen to maximize
the function. For each different value of a there will typically be a different
optimal choice of x. In sufficiently regular cases, we will be able to write the
function x(a) that gives us the optimal choice of x for each different value
of a. For example, in some economic problem the choice variable might
be the amount consumed or produced of some good while the parameter a
will be a price.
  We can also define the (optimal) value function, M(a) = f (x(a),a).
This tells us what the optimized value of f is for different choices of a.


EXAMPLE: The value function

We have seen above that for f (x, a) = In x - ax, the optimal value of
x is x(a) = l l a . Hence the value function for this problem is given by
M(a) = ln(l/a) - a l a = - lna - 1.
  For the example g(x, b) = u(x) - bx, we have M(b) = u(x(b)) - bx(b).


  In economics we are often interested in how the optimized value changes
as the parameter a changes. It turns out that there is a simple way to
calculate this change. By definition we have



Differentiating both sides of this identity, we have
                                           SINGLE VARIABLE OPTIMIZATION    491


Since x(a) is the choice of x that maximizes f , we know that




Substituting this into the above expression, we have




A better way t o write this is




In this notation it is clear that the derivative is taken holding x fixed at
the optimal value x(a).
  In other words: the total derivative of the value function with respect
to the parameter is equal t o the partial derivative when the derivative is
evaluated at the optimal choice. This statement is the simplest form of the
envelope t h e o r e m . It is worthwhile thinking about why this happens.
When a changes there are two effects: the change in a directly affects f
and the change in a affects x which in turn affects f . But if x is chosen
optimally, a small change in x has a zero effect on f , so the indirect effect
drops out and only the direct effect is left.


EXAMPLE: The envelope theorem

Continuing with the f (x, a ) = l n x - a x example, we recall that M ( a ) =
                     1
- l n a - 1. Hence M (a) = -l/a. We can also see this using the envelope
theorem; by direct calculation we see that d f ( x , a ) / d a = -x. Setting x
equal to its optimal value, we have df (x, a ) / d a = - l / a = M 1 (a).
  For the case where M(b) = g(x(b), b) = u(x(b)) - bx(b), we have M1(b) =
-x(b).



Comparative statics

Another question of interest in economics is how the optimal choice changes
as a parameter changes. Analysis of this sort is known as c o m p a r a t i v e
s t a t i c s analysis or sensitivity analysis. The basic calculation goes as
follows. We know that the optimal choice function x(a) must satisfy the
condition
492 OPTIMIZATION (Ch. 27)


Differentiating both sides of this identity,
                  d 2 f(4.1, a) dx(a)   +   d 2 f(x(a),a ) iz 0.
                       ax2       da             dxda
Solving for dx(a)/da, we have



  We know that the denominator of this expression is negative due to the
second-order conditions for maximization. Noting the minus sign preceding
the fraction, we can conclude that

                           dx(a) = sign d 2 f (.(a), a )
                      sign -
                             da              dxda        '


Hence, the sign of the derivative of the optimal choice with respect t o
the parameter depends only on the second cross-partial of the objective
function with respect to x and a.
  The nice feature of this is that we don't actually have t o repeat this
calculation every time; we can simply use the information about the cross-
partial.


EXAMPLE: Comparative statics for a particular problem

If f (x,a ) = In x - ax, we saw above that x(a) = l l a . By direct calculation
xf(a) < 0. But we could have seen this without solving the maximization
problem simply by observing that

                            d2f(51a) = -1 < 0.
                             dxda
  In the optimization problem with the objective function g(x, b) = u(x) -
bx, we can immediately see that
                         sign xl(b) = sign (-1) < 0.
This is a remarkable example: we know almost nothing about the shape of
the function u(x), and yet we are able to determine how the optimal choice
must change as the parameter changes simply by using the properties of
the form of the objective function. We will examine many examples of this
sort in our study of microeconomics.


  For minimization problems, all that changes is the sign of the denomi-
nator. Since the second-order condition for minimization implies that the
second derivative with respect to the choice variable is positive, we see
that the sign of the derivative of the choice variable with respect t o the
parameter is the opposite of the sign of the cross-partial derivative.
                                                MULTIVARIATE MAXIMIZATION   493



27.2 Multivariate maximization

Let us now consider the next level of complexity of maximization problems.
Now we have two choice variables, xl and 2 2 . It will often be convenient
to write these two variables as a vector x = (XI,22).
  In this case we write the maximization problem using the notation




or, more generally, as
                                        f(x).



First- and second-order conditions

Here the first-order conditions take the form that the partial derivative
of the objective function with respect to each choice variable must van-
ish. If there are only two choice variables, this gives us the two necessary
conditions
                              af ( ~ 1 ,
                                      22) = 0
                                  8x1



  If there are n choice variables, it is convenient to define the gradient
vector, Df (x) by



Using this notation we can write the n first-order conditions as

                                Df (x*) = 0 .
This equation simply says that at the optimal choice x* the vector of partial
derivatives must equal the zero vector.
  The second-order conditions for the two-choice variable problem are most
easily expressed in terms of the matrix of second derivatives of the objective
function. This matrix, known as the Hessian matrix, takes the form

                                    fll   f12
                               = (f21     f 2 ~ )


where fij stands for d2f /dxidxj.
494 OPTIMIZATION (Ch. 27)


  Calculus tells us that at the optimal choice x*, the Hessian matrix must
be negative semidefinite. This means that for any vector (hl, hz), we
must satisfy
                      (hl, hz) ( f l
                                  f21l    f2 2
                                           12)   (kt) 5 0.
More generally, let us think of h as a column vector and let ht be the
transpose of h. Then we can write the condition characterizing a negative
semidefinite matrix as
                               htHh 5 0.
  If we are examining a minimization problem rather than a maximization
problem, then the first-order condition is the same, but the second-order
condition becomes the requirement that the Hessian matrix be positive
semidefinite.


Comparative statics

Suppose we want to determine how the optimal choice functions respond
to changes in a parameter a. We know that the optimal choices have to
satisfy the first-order conditions




Differentiating these two expressions with respect to a, we have




This is more conveniently written in matrix form as




If the matrix on the left-hand side of this expression is invertible, we can
solve this system of equations to get

                   (xi"')
                     x; (a)
                              =   ( fll f12)-l (I;;)
                                    f21    f22

Rather than invert the matrix, it is often easier to use Cramer's rule,
described in Chapter 26, page 477, to solve the system of equations for
dxl/da, etc.
                                                  MULTIVARIATE MAXIMIZATION   495


  For example, if we want to solve for ax Jda, we can apply Cramer's rule
to express this derivative as the ratio of two determinants:


                                - - I -f23
                              axl
                              -                  f 2 ~  1
                               aa         l fll f12 I       '



By the second-order condition for maximization, the matrix in the denomi-
nator of this expression is a negative semidefinite matrix. Elementary linear
algebra tells us that this matrix must have a positive determinant. Hence
the sign of dxllda is simply the sign of the determinant in the numerator.


EXAMPLE: Comparative statics
Let f (XI,2 2 , a1, a2) = u1 ($1)   + u2 (22) - a121 - a2x2. The first-order con-
ditions for maximizing f are
                                    ui(x;) - a1 = 0
                                    uk(x;) - a2 = 0.
The second-order condition is that the matrix


is negative semidefinite. Since a negative semidefinite matrix must have
diagonal terms that are less than or equal to zero, it follows that uy(xT) 5 0
and u!j'(xz) 5 0.
   The maximized value function is given by
                                            +
              M(al, a2) = max ul (XI) uz(x2) - aixi - a2229
                            2 1 7x2

and a simple calculation using the envelope theorem shows that




  The comparative statics calculation immediately above shows that



Carrying out the calculation of the determinant,
                                    8x1
                               sign - 1 0.
                                    dal
   Note that we can determine how the choice variable responds to changes
in the parameter without knowing anything about the explicit functional
form of ul or u2; we only have to know the strzlcture of the objective
function-in this case, that it is additively separable.
496 OPTIMIZATION (Ch. 27)



Convexity and concavity

A function f : Rn + R is concave if



                               <
for all x and y and all 0 5 t 1. This has the same interpretation as in
the univariate case; namely, that f evaluated at a weighted average of x
and y is at least as large as the weighted average of f(x) and f(y).
  It turns out that a concave function must satisfy the inequality



In the two-dimensional case, we can write this as




or, carrying out the multiplication,




This is a natural generalization of the one-dimensional condition.
   There is also a nice generalization of the second-derivative condition for
concavity. Recall that in the one-dimensional case, the second derivative of
a concave function must be less than or equal to zero. In the multidimen-
sional case, the condition for concavity is that the matrix of second deriva-
tives is negative semidefinite at every point. Geometrically, this means
that the graph of a concave function must "curve away" from its tangent
plane in every direction. This means that the second-order conditions for
maximization are automatically satisfied for concave functions. Similarly,
the Hessian matrix for a convex function must be positive semidefinite.
   If the Hessian matrix of a function is negative definite at every point,
then the function must be strictly concave. However the converse is not
true: the Hessian of a strictly concave function may be singular at some
points. This is true even in one dimension; consider the function -x 4 at
x = 0.


Quasiconcave and quasiconvex functions

A function f : Rn + R is quasiconcave if the upper contour sets of the
function are convex sets. In other words, sets of the form {x E Rn : f(x) 2
a) are convex for all values of a. A function f(x) is quasiconvex if -f (x)
is quasiconcave.
                                                 CONSTRAINED MAXIMIZATION   497



27.3 Constrained maximization

Consider a constrained maximization problem of the form

                                  max f (XI,22)
                                  X1rXZ

                           such that g(xl, x2) = 0.

In order to state the first- and second-order conditions for this problem, it
is convenient to make use of the Lagrangian:




The variable A is known as a Lagrange multiplier. As we shall see, it
turns out to have a useful economic interpretation.
  The first-order conditions require that the derivatives of the Lagrangian
with respect to each of its arguments are zero.




There are 3 unknowns-xl, x2, and A-and three equations; often one will
be able to solve this system of equations for the optimizing choices.
  The n-dimensional optimization problem has the same general structure.
The problem is
                                     max f (XI
                                      X


                                such that g(x) = 0,

so that the Lagrangian becomes




and the n   + 1first-order conditions have the form
                      - af(x)      A-=O
                                     %(XI         f o r i = l , ..., n
                dx;      dxi          axi
498 OPTIMIZATION (Ch. 27)


  The second-order conditions make use of the Hessian matrix of the La-
grangian. In the twedimensional problem, this is




The second-order condition requires that this matrix must be negative semi-
definite subject to a linear constraint
             h t D 2 c ( x ) h5 0 for all h satisfying Dg(x)h= 0.
Intuitively, this condition requires that the Hessian matrix be negative
semidefinite for any change in a direction tangent to the constraint surface.
  If the Hessian matrix is negative definite subject to the constraint, then
we say that we have a regular maximum. A regular maximum must be
a strict local maximum, but the reverse is not necessarily true.


27.4 An alternative second-order condition
There is an alternative way to state the second-order condition in the case
of a regular local maximum. In this case seeing whether a particular matrix
is negative definite subject to a linear constraint can be reduced to checking
the signs of various determinants of a certain matrix.
   Consider the matrix of second derivatives of the Lagrangian, including
the various derivatives with respect to the Lagrange multiplier, A. If there
are two choice variables and one constraint, this matrix will look like this:




It is straightforward to calculate the following derivatives using the defini-
tion of the Lagrangian and the first-order conditions:
                                     a2c -
                                AN ALTERNATIVE SECOND-ORDER CONDITION     499


Inserting these expressions into (27.3) gives us the bordered Hessian
matrix:




Note that this matrix has the form




where the "border terms" are the negative of the first derivatives of the
constraint, and the hij terms are the second derivatives of the Lagrangian
with respect to'the choice variables. If there are n choice variables and
                                                        +
1 constraint, the bordered Hessian will be an n 1 dimensional square
matrix. We give an example with four choice variables below.
   It turns out that in the case of a regular maximum with bl # 0, the
second-order conditions given above imply that the bordered Hessian has
a positive determinant. The proof of this fact is not difficult, but is rather
tedious, and is omitted.
   It is worth observing that the sign of the determinant of the bordered
Hessian will not change if we multiply the first row and column by -1.
This operation will eliminate the minus signs on the border and make for
a somewhat neater looking expression. Some authors write the bordered
Hessian this way to start with. However, if you do that it is not so obvious
that the bordered Hessian is just the Hessian matrix of the Lagrangian,
including the derivatives with respect to A.
  If there are n choice variables, and one constraint, the bordered Hessian
            +          +
will be a n 1 by n 1 matrix. In this case, we have to look at the
determinants of various submatrices of the bordered Hessian. We illustrate
this calculation in the case of a 4 by 4 bordered Hessian. Denote the border
terms by bi and the Hessian terms by hi,, as above, so that the bordered
Hessian is
                           0 bl       b2    b3



                           b3   h31   h32   h33   h34
                           b4   h41   h42   h43   h44

  Consider the case of a regular maximum, where the Hessian is negative
definite subject to constraint, and assume bl # 0. Then an equivalent set of
second-order conditions is that the following determinant conditions must
500 OPTIMIZATION (Ch. 27)


hold:




The same pattern holds for an arbitrary number of factors. We express this
condition by saying that naturally odere$ principal minors of the bordered
Hessian must alternate in sign.
  The analogous second-order condition for a regular local minimum is
that the same set of determinants must all be negative.


How to remember the second-order conditions

You may have trouble remembering all the determinant conditions involv-
ing second-order conditions-at least, I do. So here is a simple way to think
about the conditions.
  The simplest example of a positive definite matrix is the identity matrix.
Calculating the determinants, it is easy to see that the principal minors of
the identity matrix are all positive.
  The simplest example of a negative definite matrix is the negative of
the identity matrix. It is not hard to see that the principal minors of this
matrix must alternate in sign:




  Suppose that we have a matrix that is positive definite subject to linear
constraint. The easiest case of this is an identity matrix subject to the
constraint (hl,hz)(l,1) = 0. This gives us the bordered Hessian
                               AN ALTERNATIVE SECOND-ORDER CONDITION   501


The upper-left minor is


The determinant of the whole matrix is found by expanding along the first
column:
                        -

Hence, the condition for a matrix to be positive definite subject to con-
straint is that all principal minors of the bordered Hessian are negative.
   We next examine a matrix that is negative semidefinite subject to con-
straint. Again, take the simplest example: the negative of the identity
matrix and the constraint (hl, hz)(l,1) = 0. This gives us the bordered
Hessian

                               (y -;p ) .
The two principal minors are



and



Hence we want the principal minors to alternate in sign.


The envelope theorem

Consider a parameterized maximization problem of the form
                       M(a) = max g(xl,xz,a)
                                 X1,XZ

                            such that h(x1, XZ, a) = 0.
The Lagrangian for this problem is


and the first-order conditions are
502 OPTIMIZATION (Ch. 27)


These conditions determine the optimal choice functions (xl(a),x2(a)),
which in turn determine the maximum value function



  The envelope theorem gives us a formula for the derivative of the
value function with respect to a parameter in the maximization problem.
Specifically, the formula is




As before, the interpretation of the partial derivatives needs special care:
they are the derivatives of g and h with respect to a holding xl and 2 2
jked at their optimal values.
  The proof of the envelope theorem is a straightforward calculation. Dif-
ferentiate the identity (27.5) to get




and substitute from the first-order conditions (27.4) to find




  Now observe that the optimal choice functions must identically satisfy
the constraint h(xl (a), x2(a),a ) r 0. Differentiating this identity with
respect to a, we have




  Substitute (27.7) into (27.6) to find



which is the required result.


27.5 Constrained maximization with inequality constraints

In many problems in economics it is natural to use inequality constraints.
Here we examine the appropriate form of the first-order conditions for such
problems.
              CONSTRAINED MAXIMIZATION WITH INEQUALITY CONSTRAINTS       503


 Let f : R n -r R and g,: R n -r R for z = 1,.. . , k, and consider the opti-
mization problem




   The set of points { x : g,(x*) I 0 z = 1,.. . , k) is called the feasible
set. If at a particular x* we have g,(x*) = 0, we say that the zth constraint
is a binding constraint; otherwise, we say that the zth constraint is not
binding, or is a slack constraint.
   Let G ( x * ) be the set of gradients of the binding constraints at x*:

           G ( x * )= {Dg,(x*) : for all z such that g,(x*) = 0.).

Then we say that the constraint qualification holds if the set of vectors
G ( x * ) is linearly independent.

Kuhn-Tucker Theorem. If x* solves (27.8) and the wnstmznt qualzfi-
catzon holds at x*, then there m t s a set of Kuhn-Tucker multipliers
A, 2 0, for z = 1,. . . , k such that




Furthermore, we have the complementary slackness condztzons:

                           A, 2 0 for all z ,
                           A, = 0 if g,(x*) < 0.

  Comparing the Kuhn-Tucker theorem to the Lagrange multiplier theo-
rem, we see that the major difference is that the signs of the Kuhn-Tucker
multipliers are nonnegative while the signs of the Lagrange multipliers can
be anything. This additional information can occasionally be very useful.
  The Kuhn-Tucker theorem is, of course, only a necessary condition for a
maximum. However, in one important case it is necessary and sufficient.

Kuhn-Tucker sufficiency.         Suppose that f zs a concave functzon and
g, zs a convex functzon for z = 1,.. . , k . Let x* be a feaszble poznt and
suppose that we can find nonnegatzve numbers A, conszstent wzth comple-
mentary slackness such that D f ( x * )= ~ f =    ~ Then x* solves the
                                            A,Dg(x*).
maxzmzzatzon problem stated zn (27.8).

Proof. Let x be a feasible point. Since f is concave we can write
504 OPTIMIZATION (Ch. 27)


Using the hypothesis of the theorem, we can write this as




Since gi(x) is convex, we have



                                  <
If constraint i is binding, gi(x) gi(x*) = 0; since Xi 2 0 XiDgi(x*)(x-
x*) 5 0 for all binding constraints. If constraint i is slack, Xi = 0. Applying
these observations to inequality (27.9), we see that each term in the sum
                                       <
is less than or equal to zero so f (x) f (x*), as required.


27.6 Setting up Kuhn-Tucker problems

The Lagrange conditions for a constrained maximum and a constrained
minimum problem are the same, since they deal only with first-order con-
ditions. The Kuhn-Tucker conditions are also the same, if the problem is
set up in the correct way. In general, this may require some manipulation
before applying the theorem.
   Recall that we stated the Kuhn-Tucker conditions for a maximization
problem of the form

                            X
                                f (4
                   suchthat gi(x) < O      for i = 1, ..., k.

The Lagrangian for this problem is




When the problem is set up in this way, the Kuhn-Tucker multipliers are
guaranteed to be nonnegative.
  In some problems the constraints require that some function be greater
than or equal to zero. In this case we must multiply the constraint through
by -1 to put it in the proper form to apply the Kuhn-Tucker conditions.
For example, suppose that we had the problem

                        max
                         X
                            f (x)
                   such that hi(x) 2 0 for i = I , . . . , k .
                                  EXISTENCE AND CONTINUITY OF A MAXIMUM   505


This is equivalent to the problem

                       m?       f( 4
                 such that - h,(x) 5 0 for i = 1 , . . . , k,

which is of the required form.
 For this problem the Lagrangian becomes




Since the transformed problem has the proper form, the multipliers (Xi)
are guaranteed to be nonnegative.
  Suppose that we are studying a minimization problem. Then t o get the
Kuhn-Tucker multipliers to have the right (nonnegative) signs, we have to
set the problem up to have the form

                         min f (x)
                            X


                   such that gi(x)     > 0 for i = I , . . . , k .
Note that a minimization problem requires greater-than inequalities, while
a maximization problem requires less-than inequalities.


27.7 Existence and continuity of a maximum

Consider a parameterized maximization problem of the form

                         M ( a ) = max f ( x , a )
                                                                      (27.11)
                             such that x is in G(a)

Existence of a n o p t i m u m . If the constraint set G ( a ) is nonempty and
compact, and the function f is continuous, then there exists a solution x*
to this maximization problem.

Uniqueness of o p t i m u m . If the function f is strictly concave and the
constraint set is convex, then a solution, should it exist, is unique.

  Let x(a) be a solution to problem (27.11). It is often of interest to know
when x(a) is well-behaved. The first problem we must face is that x(a)
may not in general be a function: there may, in general, be several points
that solve the optimization problem. That is, for each a , x(a) will be a
set of points. A correspondence is a rule that associates to each a a
set of x's. We want to examine how a set of points x(a) changes as a
506 OPTIMIZATION (Ch. 27)


changes; in particular we want to know when x ( a ) changes "continuously"
as a changes.
   It turns out that there are two definitions of continuity that are appropri-
ate for correspondences. If the set x ( a ) does not "explode" when a changes
slightly then we say the correspondence is upper-semicontinuous. If the
set x ( a ) does not 'Limplode"when a changes slightly, then we say the corre-
spondence is lower-semicontinuous. If a correspondence is both upper-
and lower-semicontinuous, then it is'said to be continuous.

Theorem of the maximum. Let f(x,a ) be a continuous function with
a compact range and suppose that the constraint set G ( a ) is a nonempty,
compact-valued, continuous correspondence of a. Then ( I ) M ( a ) is a con-
tinuous function and (2) x ( a ) is an upper-semicontinuous correspondence.

  If the correspondence x ( a ) happens to be single-valued, so that x ( a ) is
a function, then it will be a continuous function.

Notes

See Dixit (1990) for an intuitive discussion and examples of optimization in
economics. See Blume & Simon (1991) for a more in-depth treatment. See
Berge (1963) and Hildenbrand & Kirman (1988) for more on topological
properties of correspondences.
             REFERENCES

Abreu, D. (1986). Extremal equilibria of oligopolistic supergames. Journal
 of Economic Theory, 39, 191-225.
Afriat, S. (1967). The construction of a utility function from expenditure
 data. International Economic Review, 8, 67-77.
Akerlof, G. (1970). The market for lemons: Quality uncertainty and the
 market mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 89, 488-500.
Anscombe, F. & Aumann, R, (1963). A definition of subjective probability.
 Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 34, 199-205.
Arrow, K. (1951). An extension of the basic theorems of classical welfare
 economics. In P. Newman (Ed.), Readings in Mathematical Economics.
 Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Arrow, K. (1970).    Essays in the Theory of Risk Bearing.       Chicago:
 Markham.
Arrow, K. & Debreu, G. (1954). Existence of equilibrium for a competitive
 economy. Econometrica, 22, 265-290.
Arrow, K. & Hahn, F. (1971). General Competitive Analysis. San Fran-
 cisco: Holden-Day.
Atkinson, T . & Stiglitz, J. (1980). Lectures on Public Economics. New
 York: McGraw-Hill.
Aumann, R. (1987). Game theory. In J. Eatwell, M. Milgate, & P. Newman
 (Eds.), The New Palgrave. London: MacMillan Press.
Berge, C. (1963). Topological Spaces. New York: Macmillan.
Bergstrom, T., Blume, L., & Varian, H. (1986). On the private provision
 of public goods. Journal of Public Economics, 29(1), 25-49.
Binmore, K. (1982). Mathematical Analysis (2 ed.). Cambridge: Cam-
 bridge University Press.
Binmore, K. (1983). Calculus. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Binmore, K. (1991). Fun and Games. San F'rancisco: Heath.
AZ REFERENCES

 Binmore, K. & Dasgupta, P. (1987). The Ewnomics of Bargaining. Ox-
  ford: Basil Blackwell.
 Blackorby, C., Primont, D., & Russell, R. (1979). Duality, Separability and
  Functional Structure: Thwry and Ewnomic Applications. Amsterdam:
  North-Holland.
 Blackorby, C. & Russell, R. R. (1989). Will the real elasticity of substi-
  tution please stand up. American Economic Review, 79 (4), 882-888.
 Blume, L. & Simon, C. (1991). Mathematics for Economists. New York:
  W. W. Norton & Co.
 Clarke, E. (1971). Multipart pricing of public goods. Public Choice, 11,
  17-33.
 Coase, R. (1960). The problem of social cost. Journal of Law and Eco-
  nomics, 3, 1-44.
Cook, P. (1972). A one-line proof of the Slutsky equation. American
 Economic Review, 42, 139.
Davidson, C. & Deneckere, R. (1986). Long-run competition in capacity,
 short-run competition in price, and the Cournot model. RAND Journal
 of Economics, 17, 404-415.
Deaton, A. & Muellbauer, J. (1980). Economics and Consumer Behavior.
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Debreu, G. (1953). Valuation equilibrium and Pareto optimum. In K. Ar-
 row & T. Scitovsky (Eds.), Readings in Welfare Ewnomics. Homewood,
 Ill.: Irwin.
Debreu, G. (1959). Thwry of Value. New York: Wiley.
Debreu, G. (1964). Continuity properties of Paretian utility. International
 Economic Review, 5, 285-293.
Debreu, G. (1974). Excess demand functions. Journal of Mathematical
 Economics, 1, 15-22.
Debreu, G. & Scarf, H. (1963). A limit theorem on the core of an economy.
 International Economic Review, 4, 235-246.
Dierker, E. (1972). Two remarks on the number of equilibria of an econ-
 omy. Econometrica, 40, 951-953.
Diewert, E. (1974). Applications of duality theory. In M. Intriligator &
 D. Kendrick (Eds.), Frontiers of Quantitative Economics. Amsterdam:
 North-Holland.
Dixit, A. (1986). Comparative statics for oligopoly. International Eco-
 nomic Review, 27, 107-122.
                                                              REFERENCES   A3


    Dixit, A. (1990). Optimization in Economic Theory (2 ed.). Oxford:
     Oxford University Press.
.   Dowrick, S. (1986). von Stackelberg and Cournot duopoly: Choosing roles.
     Rand Journal of Economics, l 7 ( l ) , 251-260.
    Friedman, J . (1971). A noncooperative equilibrium for supergames. Re-
     view of Economic Studies, 38, 1-12.
    Frisch, R. (1965). Theory of Production. Chicago: Rand McNally.
    Fudenberg, D. & Tirole, J. (1991). Game Theory. Cambridge: MIT Press.
    Geanakoplos, J. (1987). Overlapping generations model of general equilib-
     rium. In J. Eatwell, M. Milgate, & P. Newman (Eds.), The New Palgrave.
     London: MacMillan Press.
    Gorman, T. (1953). Community preference fields. Econornetrica, 21, 63-
     80.
    Groves, T. (1973). Incentives in teams. Econornetrica, 41, 617-631.
    Harsanyi, J . (1967). Games of incomplete information played by Bayesian
     players. Management Science, 14, 159-182, 320-334, 486-502.
    Hart, 0. & Holmstrom, B. (1987). The theory of contracts. In T. Bewley
     (Ed.), Advances in Economic Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press.
    Herstein, I. & Milnor, J. (1953). An axiomatic approach to measurable
     utility. Econometrica, 21, 291-297.
    Hicks, J. (1932). Theory of Wages. London: Macmillan.
    Hicks, J. (1946). Value and Capital. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
    Hicks, J. (1956). A Revision of Demand Theory. London: Oxford Univer-
     sity Press.
    Hildenbrand, W. & Kirman, A. (1988). Equilibrium Analysis. Amsterdam:
     North-Holland.
    Holmstrom, B. & Milgrom, P. (1987). Aggregation and linearity in the
     provision of intertemporal incentives. Econornetrica, 55, 303-328.
    Hotelling, H. (1932). Edgeworth's taxation paradox and the nature of
     demand and supply function. Political Economy, 40, 577-616.
    Hurwicz, L. & Uzawa, H. (1971). On the integrability of demand functions.
     In J. Chipman, L. Hurwicz, M. Richter, & H. Sonnenschein (Eds.), Pref-
     erences, Utility, and Demand. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich.
    Ingersoll, J. (1987). Theory of Financial Decision Making. Totowa, New
     Jersey: Rowman & Littlefield.
A4 REFERENCES


 Kierkegaard, S. (1938). The Journals of Soren Kzerkegaard. Oxford: Ox-
  ford University Press.
 Koopmans, T. (1957). Three Essays on the State of Economic Sczence.
  New Haven: Yale University Press.
 Kreps, D. (1990). A Course zn Mzcroeconomzc Theory. Princeton Univer-
  sity Press.
 Kreps, D. & Scheinkman, J . (1983). Quantity pre-commitment and
  Bertrand competition yield Cournot outcomes. Bell Journal of Eco-
  nomzcs, 14, 326-337.
 Ledyard, J . (1986). The scope of the hypothesis of Bayesian equilibrium.
  Journal of Economzc Theory, 39, 59-82.
 Lindahl, E. (1919). Just taxation-a positive solution. In R. Musgrave
  & A. Peacock (Eds.), Classzcs zn the Theory of Publzc Fznance. London:
  Macmillan.
 Machina, M (1982) 'Expected utility' analysis without the independence
 axiom. Econometnca, 50, 277-323.
 Marshall, A. (1920). Pnnczples of Economzcs. London: Macmillan.
 Maskin, E. & Roberts, K. (1980). On the fundamental theorems of general
 equilibrium. Technical Report 43, Cambridge University, Cambridge,
 England.
 McFadden, D. (1978). Cost, revenue, and profit functions. In M. Fuss &
  D. McFadden (Eds.), Productzon Economzcs: A Dual Approach to Theory
  and Applzcatzons. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
 McFadden, D. & Winter, S. (1968). Lecture Notes on Consumer Theory.
  University of California at Berkeley: Unpublished.
 McKenzie, L. (1954). On equilibrium in Graham's model of world trade
 and other competitive systems. Econometnca, 22, 147-161.
 McKenzie, L. (1957). Demand theory without a utility index. Revzew of
  Economzc Studzes, 24, 183-189.
 Milgrom, P. (1981). Good news and bad news: Representation theorems
  and applications. Bell Journal of Economzcs, 13, 380-391.
 Milgrom, P. & Roberts, J . (1982). Limit pricing and entry under incom-
  plete information: An equilibrium analysis. Econometnca, 50, 443-459.
 Mirrlees, J. (1982). The theory of optimal taxation. In K. Arrow &
  M. Intriligator (Eds.), Handbook of Mathematzcal Economzcs, volume 11.
  Amsterdam: North-Holland.
                                                            REFERENCES   A5

Myenon, R. (1986). An introduction to game theory. In S. Reiter (Ed.),
 Studies in Mathematical Economics. Mathematical Association of Amer-
ica.
Myerson, R. (1991). Game Theory. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Nash, J. (1950). Equilibrium points in n-person games. Proceedings of the
 National Academy of Sciences, 36, 48-49.
Nash, J. (1951). Non-cooperative games. Annals of Mathematics, 54,
 286-295.
Negisihi, T. (1960). Welfare economics and the existence of an equilibrium
 for a competitive economy. Metroeconomica, 12, 92-97.
Neumann, J. & Morgenstern, 0. (1944). Theory of Games and Economic
 Behavior. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Novshek, W. (1980). Cournot equilibrium with free entry. Review of
 Economic Studies, 4 7, 473-486.
Pigou, A. (1920). The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan.
Pollak, R. (1969). Conditional demand functions and consumption theory.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 83, 60-78.
Pratt, J. (1964). Risk aversion in the small and in the large. Ewnometrica,
 32, 122-136.                   -


Rasmusen, E. (1989). Games and Information. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Ross, S. (1976). The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. Journal of
 Economic Theory, 13, 341-360.
Ross, S. (1977). The capital asset pricing model (CAPM), short sales
 restrictions and related issues. Journal of Finance, 32, 177-183.
Ross, S. (1978). A simple approach to the valuation of risky streams.
 Journal of Business, 51, 453-475.
Rothschild, M. & Stiglitz, J. (1976). Equilibrium in competitive insurance
 markets: An essay on the economics of imperfect information. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 80, 6 2 M 4 9 .
Roy, R. (1942). De l'utilitd. Paris: Hermann.
Roy, R. (1947). La distribution de revenu entre les divers biens. Econo-
 metrica, 15, 205-225.
Rubinstein, M. (1976). The valuation of uncertain income streams and
 the pricing of options. Bell Journal of Economics, 7, 407-25.
Samuelson, P. (1947). Foundations of Economic Analysis. Cambridge,
 Mass.: Harvard University Press.
A6 REFERENCES


 Samuelson, P. (1948). Consumption theory in terms of revealed preference.
  Econometnca, 15, 243-253.
 Samuelson, P. (1951). Abstract of a theorem concerning substitutability
  in an open Leontief model. In T. Koopmans (Ed.), Actzvzty Analyszs of
  Productzon and Consumptzon. New York: Wiley.
Samuelson, P. (1954). The pure theory of public expenditure. The Revzew
 of Economzcs and Statzstzcs, 64, 387-389.
 Samuelson, P. (1974). Complementarity: An essay on the 40th anniversary
  of the Hicks-Allen revolution in demand theory. Journal of Economzc
  Lzterature, 64 (4), 1255-1289.
Scarf, H. (1973). The Computatzon of Ewnomzc Equzlzbnum. New Haven:
 Yale University Press.
Shafer, W. & Sonnenschein, H. (1982). Market demand and excess de-
 mand functions. In K Arrow & M. Intriligator (Eds.), Handbook of
 Mathematzcal Economzcs. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Shapiro, C. (1989). Theories of oligopoly behavior. In R. Schmalensee &
 R. Willig (Eds.), Handbook of Industnal Organzzatzon, volume 1. Ams-
 terdam: North-Holland
Shephard, R. (1953). Cost and Productzon finctzons. Princeton, NJ:
 Princeton University Press.
Shephard, R. (1970). Cost and Productzon Functzons. Princeton, NJ:
 Princeton University Press.
Silberberg, E (1974). A revision of comparative statics methodology in
 economics. Journal of Economzc Theory, 7, 159-172.
Silberberg, E. (1990). The Structure of Economzcs. New York: McGraw-
 Hill.
Singh, N. & Vives, X. (1984). Price and quantity competition in a differ-
 entiated duopoly. Rand Journal of Economzcs, 15, 546-554.
Sonnenschein, H. (1968). The dual of duopoly is complementary monop-
 oly: or, two of Cournot's theories are one. Journal of Polztzcal Economy,
 36, 316-318.
Spence, M. (1974). Market Szgnalzng. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
 versity Press.
Spence, M (1975). Monopoly, quality and regulation. Bell Journal of
 Economzcs, 6(2), 417-429.
Tirole, J . (1988). The Theory of Industnal Organzzatzon. Cambridge:
 MIT Press.
                                                           REFERENCES   A7


Varian, H. (1980). A model of sales. Amencan Economzc Revzew, 70,
 651-659.
Varian, H. (1982a). The nonparametric approach to demand analysis.
 Econometnca, 50, 945-973.
Varian, H. (1982b). The nonparametric approach to production analysis.
 Econometnca, 52, 579-597
Varian, H. (1985). Price discrimination and social welfare. Amencan
 Economzc Revzew, 75 (4), 87Ck875.
Varian, H. (1989a). Price discrimination. In Handbook of Industrzal Or-
 ganzzatzon. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Varian, H. (1989b). A solution to the problem of externalities when agents
 are well-informed. Technical report, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Varian, H. (1990). Goodness-of-fit in optimizing models.       Journal of
 Econometmcs, 46, 125-140.
Wald, A. (1951). On some systems of equations in mathematical econom-
 ics. Econometnca, 19, 368-403.
Walras, L. (1954). Elements of Pure Economzcs. London: Allen and
 Unwin.
Weizsacker, C. V. (1971). Steady State Capztal Theory.        New York:
 Springer-Verlag.
Willig, R. (1976). Consumer's surplus without apology. Amencan Eco-
 nomzc Revzew, 66, 589-597.
Wold, H. (1943). A synthesis of pure demand analysis, i-iii. Skandznavzsk
 Aktuarzetzdsknft, 26, 27.
Yaari, M. (1969). Some remarks on measures of risk aversion and their
 uses. Journal of Economzc Theory, 1, 315-329.
Yokoyama, T. (1968). A logical foundation of the theory of consumer's
 demand. In P. Newman (Ed.), Readzngs zn Mathematzcal Economzcs.
 Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
                   ANSWERS


1 Technology

1.1 False. There are many counterexamples. Consider the technology
generated by a production function f (x) = x 2. The production set is
Y = {(y, -x) : y 5 x 2 ) which is certainly not convex, but the input re-
quirement set is V(y) = {x : x > @) which is a convex set.

1.3 €1 = a and €2 = b.

1.5 Substitute txi for i = 1,2 to get



This implies that the CES function exhibits constant returns to scale and
hence has an elasticity of scale of 1.

1.7 Let f (x) = g(h(x)) and suppose that g(h(x)) = g(h(x r)). Since g is
monotonic, it follows that h(x) = h(xr). Now g(h(tx)) = g(th(x)) and
g(h(tx r)) = g(th(x r)) which gives us the required result.

1.9 Note that we can write




Now simply define b = al /(al   + a2) and A = (a1 + a2) 5.
1.ll.a This is closed and nonempty for all y > 0 (if we allow inputs to be
negative). The isoquants look just like the Leontief technology except we
are measuring output in units of logy rather than y. Hence, the shape of
the isoquants will be the same. It follows that the technology is monotonic
and convex.

1.ll.b This is nonempty but not closed. It is monotonic and convex.

1.ll.c This is regular. The derivatives of f (xl, 22) are both positive so the
technology is monotonic. For the isoquant to be convex to the origin, it is
A10 ANSWERS


sufficient (but not necessary) that the production function is concave. To
check this, form a matrix using the second derivatives of the production
function, and see if it is negative semidefinite. The first principal minor of
the Hessian must have a negative determinant, and the second principal
minor must have a nonnegative determinant.




So the input requirement set is convex.
1.ll.d This is regular, monotonic, and convex.
1.ll.e This is nonempty, but there is no way to produce any y > 1. It is
monotonic and weakly convex.
1.ll.f This is regular. To check monotonicity, write down the production
function f (x) = ax1 -         + bx2 and compute



This is positive only if a >           thus the input requirement set is not
always monotonic.
   Looking at the Hessian of f , its determinant is zero, and the determinant
of the first principal minor is positive. Therefore f is not concave. This
alone is not sufficient to show that the input requirement sets are not
convex. But we can say even more: f is conveq therefore, all sets of the
form
                                   +
            {xl, 22: ax1 - fi bx2 5 y) for all choices of y
are convex. Except for the border points this is just the complement of
the input requirement sets we are interested in (the inequality sign goes in
the wrong direction). As complements of convex sets (such that the border
line is not a straight line) our input requirement sets can therefore not be
themselves convex.
1.ll.g This function is the successive application of a linear and a Leontief
function, so it has all of the properties possessed by these two types of
functions, including being regular, monotonic, and convex.
                                                                    ANSWERS     All


2 Profit Maximization


2.1 For profit maximization, the Kuhn-Tucker theorem requires the follow-
ing three inequalities to hold




Note that if xj* > 0, then we must have wj /p = df (x*)/dxj.

2.3 In the text the supply function and the factor demands were computed
for this technology. Using those results, the profit function is given by




  To prove homogeneity, note that
                                                      -
           r(tp, tw) = tp   );(       ei- tw   (2)        = tr(p, w),

which implies that ~ ( pw)
                         , is a homogeneous function of degree 1.
   Before computing the Hessian matrix, factor the profit function in the
following way:                                                          -




where +(a) is strictly positive for 0 < a < 1.
 The Hessian matrix can now be written as



                            a       -
                                    Za-1
                                          -a.
                                    I-" w "-1 -
                        (l-a)2p                   (1-a)

                                                                        $(a>.
                        -       a    A L                  1   2-0




  The principal minors of this matrix are
A12 ANSWERS


and 0. Therefore, the Hessian is a positive semidefinite matrix, which
implies that n(p, w) is convex in (p, w).

2.5 From the previous exercise, we know that



Differentiating, we get

                    dln(w2~2/~1~  = 1I)- d ln(x2lx1) = 1 - 0 .
                      d ln(w21~1)        dln ITRSl

2.7.a We want to maximize 202 - x 2 - wx. The first-order condition is
20 - 2x - w = 0.

2.7.b For the optimal x to be zero, the derivative of profit with respect to
x must be nonpositive at x = 0: 20 - 22 - w < 0 when x = 0, or w 20.  >
2.7.c The optimal x will be 10 when w = 0.

2.7.d The factor demand function is x = 10 - w/2, or, to be more precise,
x = max(l0 - w/2,0).

2.7.e Profits as a function of output are



Substitute x = 10 - w/2 to find




2.7.f The derivative of profit with respect to w is -(lo - w/2), which is, of
course, the negative of the factor demand.


3 Profit Function


3.1.a Since the profit function is convex and a decreasing function of the
factor prices, we know that &(wi) L 0 and q5:(wi) 2 0.

3.1.b It is zero.

3.l.c The demand for factor i is only a function of the ith price. Therefore
the marginal product of factor i can only depend on the amount of factor
                                       +
i. It follows that f (XI,22) = gl(xl) g2(x2).
                                                                   ANSWERS     A13


3.3 The first-order conditions are
                              a l -P - w l = 0
                                   21




which can easily be solved for the factor demand functions. Substituting
into the objective function gives us the profit function.

3.5 If wi is strictly positive, the firm will never use more of factor i than it
needs to, which implies xl = 22. Hence the profit maximization problem
can be written as
                            max px: - w l x l - ~ 2 x 2 .
The first-order condition is


The factor demand function and the profit function are the same as if the
                                                                     +
production function were f ( x ) = x a , but the factor price is w l w2 rather
than w . In order for a maximum to exist, a < 1.


4 Cost Minimization


4.1 Let x* be a profit-maximizing input vector for prices (p,w). This
means that x* must satisfy f(x*)- w x * 3 pf(x)- wx for all permissible
x. Assume that x* does not minimize cost for the output f(x*);i.e., there
exists a vector x** such that f(x**)2 f(x*)and w(x**- x*) < 0. But
then the profits achieved with x** must be greater than those achieved
with x*:
                                         >
                      f (x**)- wx** f(x*)- wx**


which contradicts the assumption that x* was profit-maximizing.

4.3 Following the logic of the previous exercise, we equate marginal costs
to find
                                  y1 = 1.
                   +
We also know yl y2 = y, so we can combine these two equations to get
y2 = y - 1. It appears that the cost function is c ( y ) = 1 / 2 + y - 1 = y - 112.
However, on reflection this can't be right: it is obviously better to produce
everything in plant 1 if yl < 1. As it happens, we have ignored the implicit
                    >
constraint that y2 0. The actual cost function is
A14 ANSWERS


4.5 The cost of using activity a is alwl +a2w2, and the cost of using activity
          +
b is blwl b2w2 The firm will use whichever is cheaper, so



The demand function for factor 1, for example, is given by

                                          if alw2   + a2w2 < blwl + b2w2
                                          if alw2   + a2w2 > blwl+ b2w2
               any amount between
                                          otherwise.

The cost function will not be differentiable when




4.7 No, the data violate WACM. It costs 40 to produce 100 units of output,
but at the same prices it would only cost 38 to produce 110 units of output.


5 Cost Function


5.1 The firm wants to minimize the cost of producing a given level of output:

                          c ( y )= min yf
                                  Y17Y2
                                            + yg
                            such that yl    + y2 = y.
The solution has yl = y2 = y/2. Substituting into the objective function
yields
                     C ( Y ) = (y/2I2+ ( ~ 1 2=) ~
                                                y2/2.

5.3 Consider the first technique. If this is used, then we need to have
2x1 + xg = y. Since this is linear, the firm will typically specialize and
set x2 = y or x1 = y/2 depending on which is cheaper. Hence the cost
                                              w2). Similarly, the cost function
function for this technique is ~ m i n { w ~ / 2 ,
for the other technique is y min{w3, w4/2). Since both techniques must be
used to produce y units of output,




5.5 The input requirement set is not convex. Since y = max{xl,x2),
the firm will use whichever factor is cheaper; hence the cost function is
                                                              ANSWERS   A15


~ ( ~w 1~ , ,=~min{wl,
                )      w2)y The factor demand function for factor 1 has
the form
                          Y             if wl < w2
                   XI = {either 0 or y if wl = w2 .
                          0             if wl > w2

5.7 Set up the minimization problem

                                min x1 x2 +
                                    51x2 = y.

Substitute to get the unconstrained minimization problem

                                min X I   + y/xl.
The first-order condition is
                                    1- Y ~ x ? ,
which implies xl = fi.      By symmetry, x2 = fi.        We are given that
2 f i = 4, so f i = 2, from which it follows that y = 4.




5.11.c Constant returns to scale.



5.11.e c(w, y) = [min{wl, w2)   + min{w3, w4)]y.
5.11.f Constant.

5.13.a Factor demand curves slope downward, so the demand for unskilled
workers must decrease when their wage increases.

5.13.b We are given that dlldp < 0. But by duality, dlldp = -d2x/dpdw =
-d2x/dwdp = -dy/dw. It follows that dyldw > 0.

5.15 By the linearity of the function, we know we will use either X I , or a
combination of x2 and x3 to produce y. By the properties of the Leontief
function, we know that if we use x2 and x3 to produce y, we must use 3
A16 ANSWERS


units of both 2 2 and x3 to produce one unit of y. Thus, if the cost of using
one unit of xl is less than the cost of using one unit of both 2 2 and x3,
then we will use only XI, and conversely. The conditional factor demands
can be written as:
                        XI={
                               3y if w1 < w2 w3  +
                               0 ifwl>wz+w~




            +                                                       +
if wl = wz w3, then any bundle ( XI , x2, 23) with 2 2 = 23 and x1 x2 = 3y
      +
(or XI $3 = 3y) minimizes cost.
   The cost function is




5.17.b Note that this function is exactly like a linear function, except that
the linear combination of x1 and x2 will produce y2, rather than just y.
So, we know that if xl is relatively cheaper, we will use all XI and no 2 2 ,
and conversely.

5.17.c The cost function is c(w, Y)= y2 m i n ( y , y).


6 Duality

6.1 The production function is f (xl, x2) = XI   + 2 2 . The conditional factor
demands have the form

                                               if wi < wj
                                               if wi > wj
                    any amount between 0 and y if W i = wj.


6.3 The cost function must be increasing in both prices, so a and b are both
nonnegative. The cost function must be concave in both prices, so a and
b are both less than 1. Finally, the cost function must be homogeneous of
degree 1, so a = 1 - b.
                                                                ANSWERS    A17

7 Utility Maximization


7.1 The preferences exhibit local nonsatiation, except at (0,O). The con-
sumer will choose this consumption point when faced with positive prices.

7.3 The expenditure function is e(pl,p2, u) = u min{pl,p2). The utility
function is u(xl, 22) = X I + x2 (or any monotonic transformation), and the
demand function is

              mlp1                                           if ~l < P2
      XI = { m y XI and ~2 such that pi.,+      p2x2 = m     if = p2
              0                                              if ~l > P2

7.5.a Quasilinear preferences.

7.5.b Less than u(1) - 1.




8 Choice


8.1 We know that



(Note that the partial derivative is taken with respect to the first occurrence
of pj.) Differentiating equation (27.12) with respect to m gives us




Since the marginal utility of income, dvldm, must be positive, the result
follows.

8.3 The equation is dpldt = at   + bp + c. The indirect money metric utility
function is




8.5 Write the Lagrangian
A18 ANSWERS


(Be sure you understand why we can transform u this way.) Now, equating
the derivatives with respect to XI, x2, and X to zero, we get three equations
in three unknowns                    .,




                                 3x1   + 4x2 = 100.
Solving, we get

                  x1(3, 4,100) = 20, and x2(3,4,100) = 10.

   Note that if you are going to interpret the Lagrange multiplier as the
marginal utility of income, you must be explicit as to which utility function
you are referring to. Thus, the marginal utility of income can be measured
in original 'utils' or in 'lnutils'. Let u* = l n u and, correspondingly, v* =
In v ; then



where p denotes the Lagrange multiplier in the Lagrangian



Check that in this problem we'd get ,LL = $, X = &, and v(3,4,100) =
20: 10.

8.7 Instead of starting from the utility maximization problem, let's now
start from the expenditure minimization problem. The Lagrangian is



the first-order conditions are




Divide the first equation by the second




using the last equation
                                                                ANSWERS     A19


substituting and solving,




and



Verify that


       "1'~.
          am
                  =   (PI + (&)!A( ")
                          u
                              P2   Pl
                                        "                - ah2 (p, m)
                                                                PI      .
  The expenditure function is




Solving for u, we get the indirect utility function




By Roy's law we get the Marshallian demands




and
                  m) = -
               22(~,
                              P1 + P2       + h m -Pla2m

8.9 By definition, the Marshallian demands x(p, m) maximize $(x) subject
to px = m. We claim that they also maximize +($(x)) subject to the same
budget constraint. Suppose not. Then, there would exist some other choice
XI such that +($(xl)) > +($(x(p, m))) and px' = m. But since applying

the transformation $-I(.) to both sides of the inequality will preserve it, we
would have $(xt) > #(x(p, m)) and px' = m, which contradicts our initial
assumption that x(p,m) maximized $(x) subject to px = m. Therefore
~ ( pm), = x*(p, m). (Check that the reverse proposition also holds-i.e.,
A20 ANSWERS

the choice that maximizes u* also maximizes u when the the same budget
constraint has to be verified in both cases.)



the first and last equalities hold by definition and the middle one by our
previous result; now

                   e*(p,u*) = min{px : $($(x)) = u*)
                              = min{px : $(x) = $-'(u*))
                              = e(p, +-l(u*));

again, we're using definitions at both ends and the properties of $(.) -
namely that the inverse is well defined since $(.) is monotonic- to get
the middle equality; finally using definitions and substitutions as often as
needed we get

              h*(P, u* = X* (P, e*(P, u*)) = x(p, e*(p, u*))
                       = X(P, e(p,      (u*))) = h(p, $-'(u*)).


8.11 No, because his demand behavior violates GARP. When prices are
(2,4) he spends 10. At these prices he could afford the bundle (2, I), but
                              +
rejects it; therefore, (1,2) (2,l). When prices are (6,3) he spends 15.
At these prices he could afford the bundle (1,2) but rejects it; therefore,
(2, 1) + (172).

                          +
8.13.a Draw the lines x2 2x1 = 20 and xl         + 2x2 = 20. The indifference
curve is the northeast boundary of this X.

8.13.b The slope of a budget line is -pl/p2. If the budget line is steeper
than 2, xl = 0. Hence the condition is pl /pz > 2.

8.13.c Similarly, if the budget line is flatter than 112, x2 will equal 0, so
the condition is pl /p2 < 112.

8.13.d If the optimum is unique, it must occur where 2 2 - 2x1 = XI - 2x2.
This implies that xl = 2 2 , so that x1/x2 = 1.

8.15 Use Slutsky's equation to write:      =     3% + (Z - L)%. Note that
the substitution effect is always negative, (Z - L) is always positive, and
hence if leisure is inferior, dL is necessarily negative. Thus the slope of
                              &.
the labor supply curve is positive.
A22 ANSWERS


which implies that




(Again, substitute z by m- px above, equate the derivative of the resulting
expression with respect to x to zero, solve for x and recover the original
demand function.)

9.5 To get the direct utility function we must solve

              U(X,Z) = min{v(q, m) : z
                         9
                                         + qlxl + 42x2 = m).
After a few minutes of algebraic fun, we get




and


Substituting these values back into v(.), we get




9.7 The function is weakly separable, and the subutility for the z-good
consumption is zgz,~.The conditional demands for the z-goods are Cobb-
Douglas demands:
                            z1 = --b mz
                                 b + c p2
                            22 = -
                                   C   mz
                                       .
                                 b + c p3

9.9.a The function V(x, y) = min{x, y), and U(V, z) = V   + z.
                                                                  +
9.9.b The demand function for the z-good is z = mlp, if p, < p, pv. If
P, > p, + p,, then the demand for the x-good and the y-good is given by
               +
x = y = m/(p, p,). If p, = p,     +
                                  p,, then take any convex combination
of these demands.
                                                                ANSWERS    A23


9.9.c The indirect utility function is




9.11.a There are a variety of ways to solve this problem. The easiest is to
solve for the indirect utility function to get vl(pllp2,ml) = m 1 ( ~ 1 ~ 2 ) - ~ / ~ .
Now use Roy's identity to calculate:




Note that these are Cobb-Douglas demands.
  Recognizing that person 2 has Cobb-Douglas utility, we can write down
the demands immediately:




9.11.b We must have the marginal propensity to consume each good the
same for each consumer. This means that



which implies that a = 3.


10 Consumers' Surplus


10.1 We saw that in this case the indirect utility function takes the form
v(p)+m. Hence the expenditure function takes the form e(p, u) = u - ~ ( p ) .
The expenditure function is necessarily a concave function of prices, which
implies that v(p) is a convex function.


11 Uncertainty

11.1 The proof of Pratt's theorem established that
A24 ANSWERS


But the u2t2 is simply the variance of the gamble t;.

11.3 We have seen that investment in a risky asset will be independent of
wealth if risk aversion is constant. In an earlier problem, we've seen that
constant absolute risk aversion implies that the utility function takes the
form u(w)= -e-rw.

11.5.a The probability of heads occurring for the first time on the jth toss
is (1 -p)j-'p. Hence the expected value of the bet is C P l ( l -p)j-lp2j =
C"j=1 2-j2j = C jm= l 1 = 00.
11.5.b The expected utility is




11.5.c By standard summation formulas:




Differentiate both sides of this expression with respect to p to obtain




Therefore,




11.5.d In order to solve for the amount of money required, we equate the
utility of participating in the gamble with the utility of not participating.
This gives us:



Now simply solve this equation for wo to find
                                                                   ANSWERS    A25


11.7 Risk aversion implies a concave utility function. Denote by a E [ O , l ]
the proportion of the initial wealth invested in asset 1. We have




The inequality follows from the concavity of u(.).
  For part b, proceed as before reversing the inequality since now u(.) is
convex.

11.9 Initially the person has expected utility of
                                                                                     ,



If he sells his ticket for price p, he needs to get at least this utility. To find
the breakeven price we write the equation



Solving, we have p = 5.

11.11 We want to solve the equation




After some manipulation we have




1 3 Competitive Markets


                                                +
13.1 The first derivative of welfare is vl(p) d ( p ) = 0. Applying Roy's
law and Hotelling's lemma, we have -x(p) + y (p) = 0, which is simply the
condition that demand equals supply. The second derivative of this welfare
A26 ANSWERS


measure is -zl(p) + Y'(~) which is clearly positive; hence, we have a welfare
minimum rather than a welfare maximum.
  The intuition behind this is that at any price other than the equilibrium
price, the firm wants to supply a different amount than the consumer wants
to demand; hence, the "welfare" associated with all prices other than the
equilibrium price is not attainable.

13.3.a The average cost curve is just




You should verify that it is a convex function that has a unique minimum




The derivative of y, with respect to w l / w 2is negative, so the minimum
of the average cost shifts to the left (right) as wl/w2increases (decreases).
In fact it converges to 1 as the ratio approaches oo and to f i as it goes
down to 0.

13.3.b The marginal cost is




so short-run supply schedule is given by




13.3.c The long-run supply curve is

                  arbitrarily large amount                   +
                                              if p > 2ym(wl w2)
                                              otherwise.

                                                      +
13.3.d From the cost function we have that xl = y2 1 and x2 = y 2 2.    +
Also, we see that zl and xz are not substitutes at any degree. Therefore,
the input requirement set for an individual firm is

    V(Y)= {(XI,22) E [I,00) x [2,00):y 5 min {JS,
                                               49)).
13.5.a In order to offset the output subsidy, the U.S. should choose a tax
of the same size as the subsidy; that is, choose t(s) = s.
                                                               ANSWERS    A27


13.5.b In the case of the capital subsidy, the producers receive p - t(s). If
y* is to remain optimal, we must have p - t(s) = ac(w, r - s, y*)/ay.

13.5.c Differentiate the above expression to get
                         a2c(w,r - S, y*) - aK(w, r - s, y*)
               t'(s) =                    -
                             ayar                8~

13.5.d Since K(w, r - s, y) = K(w, r - s, l)y, the formula reduces to tl(s) =
K(w, r - s,1).

13.5.e In this case dK/ay < 0 so that an increase in the subsidy rate implies
a decrease in the tariff.




14 Monopoly

14.1 The profit-maximizing level of output is 5 units. If the monopolist
only has 4 to sell, then it would find it most profitable to charge a price of
6. This is the same as the competitive solution. If, however, the monopolist
had 6 units to sell, it would be most profitable to dispose of one unit and
only sell 5 units at a price of 5.

14.3 For this constant elasticity demand function revenue is constant at
10, regardless of the level of output. Hence output should be as small as
possible-that is, a profit-maximizing level of output doesn't exist.

14.5 The monopolist's profit maximization problem is



The first-order condition for this problem is




According to the standard comparative statics calculations, the sign of
dyldt is the same as the sign of the derivative of the first-order expression
with respect to t. That is,

                          . dy . dp
                         Slgn - = Slgn -
                                             ap2
                                            +-
                              dt       at    &atY.
A28 ANSWERS

                                   +
For the special case p(y, t) = a(p) b(t), the second term on the right-hand
side is zero.

14.7 Since the elasticity of demand is -1, revenues are constant at any price
less than or equal to 20. Marginal costs are constant at c so the monopolist
will want to produce the smallest possible output. This will happen when
p = 20, which implies y = 112.

14.9 The integral to evaluate is




Carrying out the integration gives




which is what is required.

14.11 The figure depicts the situation where the monopolist has reduced
the price to the point where the marginal benefit from further reductions
just balance the marginal cost. This is the point where pz = 2pl. If the
high-demand consumer's inverse demand curve is always greater than twice
the low-demand consumer's inverse demand curve, this condition cannot
be satisfied and the low-demand consumer will be pushed to a zero level of
consumption.

14.13 This is equivalent to the price discrimination problem with x = q and
wt = r t . All of the results derived there translate on a one-teone basis;
e.g., the consumer who values quality the more highly ends up consuming
the socially optimal amount, etc.

14.15 Under the ad valorem tax we have




Under the output tax we have




Solve each equation for Po, set the results equal to each other, and solve
for t to find
                             rkc              1
                        t= -           k=-
                            1-7              l+i
                                                              ANSWERS       A29

14.17.a Differentiating the first-order conditions in the usual way gives




14.17.b The appropriate welfare function is W = ul(xl) +u2(x2)-CI(XI) -
cz(x2). The total differential is

                    dW = (u; - c',)dxl   + (u; - 4)dx2.
14.17.c Somewhat surprisingly, we should tax the competitive industry and
subsidize the monopoly! To see this, combine the answers to the first two
questions to get the change in welfare from a tax policy (tl, t2).




The change in welfare from a small tax or subsidy on the competitive in-
dustry is zero, since price equals marginal cost. But for the monopolized
industry, price exceeds marginal cost, so we want the last term to be posi-
tive. But this can only happen if dt2 is negative-i.e., we subsidizeindustry
2.

14.19.a The profit-maximizing choices of pl and p~ are




These will be equal when allbl = azlb2.

14.19.b We must have pl(l - l l b l ) = c = pz(1 - llbz). Hence pl = p2 if
and only if bl = b2.

14.21 Under the ad valorem tax we have




Under the output tax we have
A30 ANSWERS


Solve each equation for Po,set the results equal to each other, and solve
for t to find
                            rkc
                        t=-           k=- 1
                           1-7             1+;

14.23.a If c < 1, then profits are maximized at p = 312 c/2 and the  +
monopolist sells to both types of consumers. The best he can do if he sells
                                                          +
only to Type A consumers is to sell at a price of 2 c/2. He will do this if
  >
c 1.

14.23.b If a consumer has utility ax1 -x;/2+x2, then she will choose to pay
k if ( ~ - p ) ~ />2 k. If she buys, she will buy a- p units. So if k < ( 2 - ~ ) ~ / 2 ,
then demand is N(4 - p )      +   N(2 -p). If (2 -p)2 < k < (4 - ~ ) ~ / 2 ,   then
demand is N(4 - p). If k > (4 - ~ ) ~ / 2      then
                                                  , demand is zero.

14.23.c Set p = c and k = (4 - ~ ) ~ / 2
                                       The
                                         . profit will be N(4 - ~ ) ~ / 2 .

14.23.d In this case, if both types of consumers buy the good, then the
profit-maximizing prices will have the Type B consumers just indifferent
between buying and not buying. Therefore k = (2 - ~ ) ~ / 2Total
                                                             . profits
                                     +
will then be N((6 - 2p)(p - c) (2 - ~ ) ~ / 2 ) .
                                                This is maximized when
        +
p = 2(c 2)/3.


15 Game Theory

15.1 There are no pure strategy equilibria and the unique mixed strategy
equilibrium is for each player to choose Head or Tails with probability 112.

15.3 The unique equilibrium that remains after eliminating weakly domi-
nant strategies is (Bottom, Right).



15.5.b Only a   > e, b > d.
15.5.c Yes.

15.7 If one player defects, he receives a payoff of n d this period and n,
forever after. In order for the punishment strategy to be an equilibrium
the payoffs must satisfy



Rearranging, we find
                                         n j - nc
                                   7-5-
                                         7rd - T j .
                                                               ANSWERS   A31


15.9.a (Top, Left) and (Bottom, Right) are both equilibria.

15.9.b Yes. (Top, Left) dominates (Bottom, Right).

15.9.c Yes.

15.9.d (Top, Left).


16 Oligopoly

16.1 The Bertrand equilibrium has price equal to the lowest marginal cost,
cl, as does the competitive equilibrium.

16.3 Let S = P1P2 - Y2. Then by direct calculation: a, =          - %?)/a,
b, = Pj/6, and c = 716.

16.5 The argument is analogous to the argument given on page 297.

16.7 In a cartel the firms must equate the marginal costs. Due to the
assumption about marginal costs, such an equality can only be established
when yl > yz.

16.9 In the Prisoner's Dilemma, (Defect, Defect) is a dominant strategy
equilibrium. In the Cournot game, the Cournot equilibrium is only a Nash
equilibrium.



                                                        +
16.11.b Sum the first order conditions to get nP(Y) P1(Y)Y = nc           +
C:="=,,, and note that industry output Y can only depend on the sum of
the taxes.

16.11.c Since total output doesn't change, Ay, must satisfy

                  p(y)   + pl(y)[y, + Ay,] = c + t, + At,.
Using the original first order condition, this becomes P1(Y)Ay, = At,, or
AyZ= At,/Pr(Y).


1 7 Exchange

17.1 In the proof of the theorem, we established that x: -..,xi. If x: and xi
were distinct, a convex combination of the two bundles would be feasible
and strictly preferred by every agent. This contradicts the assumption that
x* is Pareto efficient.
A32 ANSWERS


17.3 Agent 2 holds zero of good 2.

17.5 There is no way to make one person better off without hurting someone
else.

17.7 The Slutsky equation for consumer i is




17.9 In equilibrium we must have pz/pl = xi/xi = 5/10 = 1/2.

17.11.a The diagram is omitted.

17.11.b We must have pl = p2.

17.11.c The equilibrium allocation must give one agent all of one good and
the other agent all of the other good.


18 Production

18.1.a Consider the following two possibilities. (i) Land is in excess supply.
(ii) All land is used. If land is in excess supply, then the price of land
is zero. Constant returns requires zero profits in both the apple and the
bandanna industry. This means that p~ = p~ = 1 in equilibrium. Every
consumer will have income of 15. Each will choose to consume 15c units
of apples and 15(1- c) units of bandannas. Total demand for land will be
15cN. Total demand for labor will be 15N. There will be excess supply of
land if c < 213. So if c < 2/3, this is a competitive equilibrium.
   If all land is used, then the total outputs must be 10 units of apples and
5 units of bandannas. The price of bandannas must equal the wage which
                                     +
is 1. The price of apples will be 1 r where r is the price of land. Since
preferences are homothetic and identical, it will have to be that each person
consumes twice as many apples as bandannas. People will want to consume
twice as much apples as bandannas if p ~ / =      p ~
                                                    &(1/2).      Then it also
must be that in equilibrium, r = (pA/pB)- 1 2 0. This last inequality will
hold if and only if c 2 213. This characterizes equilibrium for c 2 2/3.

18.1.b For c < 2/3.

18.l.c For c < 213.


19 Time

19.1 See Ingersoll (1987), page 238.
                                                              ANSWERS   A33


20 Asset Markets


20.1 The easiest way to show this is to write the first-order conditions as




and subtract.


21 Equilibrium Analysis



21.1 The core is simply the initial endowment.

21.3 Differentiating V ( p ) ,we have




22 Welfare

22.1 We have the equation




Multiply both sides of this equation by ti and sum to get




The right-hand side of expression is nonpositive (and typically negative)
since the Slutsky matrix is negative semidefinite. Hence 0 has the same
sign as R.
A34 ANSWERS


23 Public goods


23.1 Suppose that it is efficient to provide the public good together, but
neither agent wants to provide it alone. Then any set of bids such that
  +
bl bz = c and bi 5 ri is an equilibrium to the game. However, there are
also many ineficient equilibria, such as bl = b2 = 0.

23.3 Agent 1 will contribute gl = awl. Agent 2's reaction function is
      +                    +                               +
f2(w2 gl) = max(a(w2 gl) - g1,O). Solving fi(w2 awl) = 0 yields
wz = (1- a)wl.

23.5 The allocation is not in general Pareto efficient, since for some patterns
of preferences some of the private good must be thrown away. However,
the amount of the public good provided will be the Pareto efficient amount:
1 unit if Ciri > c, and 0 units otherwise.


24 Externalities

24.1.a Agent 1's utility maximization problem is



while the social problem is

                               +
                   max u1 (XI) u2(x2) - p(x1,x2) [ci
                   XllXZ
                                                       +~21.
Since agent 1 ignores the cost he imposes on agent 2, he will generally
choose too large a value of XI.

24.1.b By inspection of the social problem and the private problem, agent
1 should be charged a fine t l = c2.

24.l.c If the optimal fines are being used, then the total costs born by the
                                            +
agents in the case of an accident are 2[cl cz], which is simply twice the
total cost of the accident.

24.1.d Agent 1's objective function is



This can also be written as



This is just the form of the previous objective function with ul (xl)     + cl
replacing cl. Hence the optimal fine for agent 1 is tl = u2(x2) -I- c2.
                                                                 ANSWERS   A35

25 Information

25.1 By construction we know that f (u(s)) 3 S. Differentiating one time
shows that f'(u)u'(s) = 1. Since u'(s) > 0, we must have f'(u) > 0.
Differentiating again, we have


Using the sign assumptions on u'(s), we see that f"(u) > 0.
25.3 In this case it is just as costly to undertake the action preferred by
the principal as to undertake the alternative action. Hence, the incentive
constraint will not be binding, which implies ,u = 0. It follows that s(xi)
is constant.
25.5 In this case the maximization problem takes the form




                 such that   x
                             i=l
                                   sixib - cb 2 ii
                             n                   n




Assuming that the participation constraint is binding, and ignoring the
incentive-compatibility constraint for a moment, we can substitute into
the objective function to write

                          max        . - cb - ii.
                                   C s.n. .b


Hence, the principal will choose the action that maximizes expected output
minus (the agent's) costs, which is the first-best outcome. We can satisfy
                                                             +
the incentive-compatibility constraint by choosing si = xi F, and choose
F so that the participation constraint is satisfied.
25.7 Since 4 ( x ) > 4 (x), we must have

                       l:4    (x) dx >     1;   ci (x) dx.

The result now follows from the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.
25.9 For only low-cost workers to be employed, there must be no profitable
contract that appeals to the high-cost workers. The most profitable con-
tract to a high-cost worker maximizes 2 2 - xz, which implies x; = 112.
The cost of this to the worker is (112)~= 114. For the worker to find this
                                         +
acceptable, s 2 - 114 2 ;liZ, or = ii2 114. For the firm to make a profit,
                                     +
x; 2 s2. Hence we have 112 2 Ti2 114, or 212 5 114.
                              INDEX

acceptance set, 178                        bordered matrix, 476
activities, 5                              boundary condition, 483
activity analysis, 5                       boundary solutions, 29
additive, 21                               Bowen equilibrium, 424
additively separable, 495
adverse selection, 466                      Capital Asset Pricing Model, 371
&ne function, 482                           CAPM, 371
Afriat's theorem, 133                       cartel, 271,303
agent, 441                                  CES production function, 19
aggregate consumers' surplus, 169           CES utility function, 112
aggregate net supply function, 339          Clarke tax, 428
aggregate production possibilities set,     closed set, 478
    339                                     club goods, 415
aggregation                                 CobbDouglas technology, 4
   across consumers, 152                    collusion, 303
   across goods, 147                       common knowledge, 260
allocation, 224, 314                       compact, 478
Almost Ideal Demand System, 213            comparative statics, 31, 491
arbitrage, 368, 382                        compensated demand function, 105, 106
Arrow-Debreu securities, 363,382           compensating variation, 161
Arrow-Pratt measure of (absolute) risk     compensation criterion, 405
     aversion, 178                         competitive firm, 25, 215
Arrow-Pratt measure of relative risk       complement, 478
     aversion, 189                         complementary slackness, 57, 504
asset, 186, 187                            complete preferences, 95
asymmetric information, 440                concave, 488, 496
                                           conditional demand functions, 151
backwards induction, 270                   conditional factor demand function, 53
bargaining, 276                            conjectural variation, 302
Battle of the Sexes, 267                   constant elasticity of substitution, 19
Bayes' law, 192                            constant returns to scale, 15, 66, 88, 350
Bayes-Nash equilibrium, 279, 281           constant-returns-to-scale technology, 29
Bertrand, 291                              constraint qual;fication, 503
Bertrand equilibrium, 295                  consumer's surglus, 160, 163, 224
Bertrand model, 263                        consumption beta, 381
binding constraint, 503                    consumption bundle, 314
border                                     consumption externality, 432
  of a matrix, 476                         consumption set, 94, 342
border-preserving principal minor matri-   contingent contracts, 366
     ces, 476                              continuous, 478, 506
bordered Hessian, 53, 499                  continuous function, 478
 A38 INDEX




contract curve, 324                        envelope theorem, 45, 70, 75, 334, 491,
convergent sequence, 478                        502
convex, 482, 489                           equilibrium, 222, 485
   preferences, 97                         equilibrium price, 219
   technology, 8                           equivalent variation, 161
convex correspondence., 340                excess return, 369
convex set, 8                              excise tax, 118
convexity and size, 393                    excludable, 414
core, 388                                  existence of Walras equilibria, 343
correspondence, 340, 506                   existence of Walrasian equilibria, 317
cost function, 26, 53, 64, 72, 76, 208     existence of Walrasian equilibrium, 320
cost minimization, 49                      exit, 220
Cournot equilibrium, 285, 294              exogenous, 202
Cournot model, 262                         expectation, 177, 485
covariance, 486                            expectation of a sum, 486
covariance identity, 486                   expected return, 369
covaries, 370                              expected utility, 174, 379
Cramer's rule, 59, 477, 494                expected utility property, 173
cross-equation restrictions, 208           expenditure function, 103
                                           extensive form, 260, 274
deadweight loss, 229                       externality, 432
decreasing returns to scale, 16, 350
definite matrices, 475
demand function, 99, 315                   factor demand, 31
demand price, 228                          factor demand function, 28
demand revealing mechanisms, 426           feasible allocation, 314
demanded bundle, 99                        feasible set, 503
Diewert cost function, 209                 First Theorem of Welfare Economics,
differentiable, 478                              325, 345, 432
diminishable, 414                          first-degree price discrimination, 241, 243
directly revealed preferred, 132           first-order condition, 488
discount factor, 359                       fixed cost, 65
discounted present value, 364              fixed factors, 65
discrete good, 227                         Folk Theorem, 279
divisible, 21                              free disposal, 6
dominant strategy, 272, 427                free good, 318
dominant strategy equilibrium, 272         free riding, 417
duality, 81, 90, 91, 106, 129, 294         functional form, 209
duality mapping, 87                        functional separability, 148, 150
dynamic programming, 359, 361
dynamical system, 288, 485                 game matrix, 261
dynamics, 398                              game theory, 259
                                           game tree, 274
economic rate of substitution, 100         general equilibrium, 313
Edgeworth box, 314                         Generalized Axiom of Revealed Prefer-
Edgeworth process, 401                          ence, 132
elasticity of demand, 235                  generalized Leontief cost function, 209
elasticity of scale, 16, 88                Giffen good, 117
elasticity of substitution, 13             global risk aversion, 380
elimination of dominated strategies, 273   globally stable, 485
endogenous, 202                            goodness-of-fit, 201
endowment, 144                             Gorman form, 153
endowment income effect, 145               gradient, 26, 480
Engel curves, 116                          gradient vector, 493
entrant, 308                               gross substitutes, 395
entry, 220                                 Groves-Clarke mechanism. 427
                                                                     INDEX   A39




Hahn process, 401                     L'HBpital's rule, 69, 481
Hessian matrix, 479, 493              labor supply, 145, 341
Hicksian compensation, 135            Lagrange multiplier, 497
Hicksian demand function, 105         Lagrangian, 497
Hicksian separability, 148            Law of Large Numbers, 378
hidden action, 444                    LeChatelier principle, 47
hidden information, 444              leisure, 145
homogeneous expectations, 370        lemons market, 468
homogeneous of degree k, 17, 481     Leontief technology, 4
homogeneous of degree 1, 146         level set, 96, 103, 480
homothetic, 146, 482                 Liaponov function, 485
homothetic function, 18              likelihood ratio, 452
homothetic preferences, 147          limit, 478
Hotelling's lemma, 43                limit pricing, 308
hull, 37                             Lindahl prices, 426
hyperplane, 475                      Lindahl taxes, 426
                                     linear combination, 474
 improve upon, 388                   linear demand, 211
 incentive compatibility, 442        linear function, 475
incentive payment, 441               linear functional, 475
income effect, 120                   linear incentive payment, 443
income expansion path, 116           linear programming, 385
income tax, 119                      linearly independent, 474
increasing returns to scale, 16      local nonsatiation, 96
incumbent, 308                       locally more risk averse, 179
 index, 397                          logarithmic demand, 211
 index analysis, 395                 logarithmic derivative, 13
 indifference, 95                    logarithmic utility, 362
indifference curve, 96               long run, 3
indirect utility function, 99, 102   lotteries, 172
individual rationality, 442          lower-semicontinuous, 506
industry demand function, 219        luxury good, 117
industry supply function, 218
inferior, 117
information set, 275                 marginal consumer, 228
informed consumers, 293              marginal rate of substitution, 97, 98
inframarginal consumers, 228         market constraints, 25
initial endowment, 224, 314          market portfolio of risky assets, 375
inner product, 474                   markup, 236
input requirement set, 3             Marshallian demand function, 105
insurance, 180, 455                  maximum, 487
integrability condition, 126, 483    maximum likelihood, 204
integrability equations, 127         mean-preserving spread, 186
integrability problem, 125           mean-variance efficient, 372
interest rates, 364                  mean-variance utility function, 189
interior, 478                        median, 424
interior solutions, 28               median voter, 424
internalize, 433                     minimal efficient scale., 68
inverse elasticity rule., 412        minimum, 487
inverse supply function, 216, 218    minor determinants, 476
isoquant, 3                          minor matrices, 476
                                     minors, 476
                                     mixed strategy, 264
Jacobian matrix, 479                 money metric indirect utility function,
                                         110
Kuhn-Tucker multipliers, 503         money metric utility function, 109, 162
Kuhn-Tucker theorem, 503, 504        monopoly, 233
 A40 INDEX




 Monotone Likelihood Ratio Property,         Pigovian taxes, 433
     452                                     pivotal mechanism, 428
 monotonic                                   players, 260
  technology, 6                              points, 473
  transformation, 18                         pooling equilibrium, 464
 monotonicity                                portfolio, 186
  of preference, 96                          portfolio return, 360, 372
 moral hazard, 455                           positive definite, 475, 476
 moral hazard problem, 455                   positive definite matrix, 475
                                             positive definite subject t o constraint,
 Nash equilibrium, 265, 421                       476, 477
Nash equilibrium in pure strategies, 266     positive monotonic transformation, 18
naturally ordered, 476                       positive semidefinite, 475, 494
necessary good, 117                          posterior probability, 192
negative definite, 475, 477                  potentially Pareto preferred, 405
negative definite subject t o constraint,    preferences, 94
     477                                     price discrimination, 241, 250
negative semidefinite, 28, 475, 494          price leadership, 298
nested principal minor matrices, 476         price offer curve, 117
net demand, 145                              price stabilization, 43
net output, 2                               price-taking behavior, 25
net substitutes, 395                        principal, 441
net value, 426                               principal-agent, 441
non-cooperative, 303                        prior probability, 192
nonlinear pricing, 244                      Prisoner's Dilemma, 417
nonlinear pricing., 242                     Prisoners' Dilemma, 261
nonrival, 414                               private costs, 433
Nonsubstitution Theorem, 350, 354           private goods, 414
nontatonnement models, 401                  producer's surplus, 224
norm, 474                                   production externality, 432
normal form, 260                            production function, 1, 4
normal goods, 117                           production plan, 2
                                            production possibilities set, 2
offer curves, 316                           profit, 23
oligopoly, 285                              profit distribution, 342
open ball, 477                              profit function, 25, 40
open set, 95, 478                           profit maximization, 25-28
optimal taxes, 410                          projection, 474
orbit, 485                                  property rights, 435
orthogonal, 474                             public goods, 414
output elasticity of a factor, 21           punishment strategy, 270
output supply, 31                           pure consumption-loan model, 365
overcompensation function, 170              pure discount bonds, 363
overlapping generations model, 365          pure exchange, 313
                                            pure strategies, 264
paradox of voting, 424
Pareto criterion, 405                       quadratic form, 475
Pareto dominate, 405                        quantity index, 147
Pareto efficiency, 225, 329                 quantity leadership, 295
Pareto set, 324                             quantity subsidy, 229
partial derivatives, 479                    quantity tax, 228
partial differential equations, 125         quasicu~cave,496
partial equilibrium, 313                    quasiconcave function, 9
participation constraint, 442               quasiconvex, 496
payoffs, 260                                quasilinear utility, 419
perfect price discrimination, 241           quasilinear utility function, 154
                                                                            INDEX   A41



 quasilinear utility function., 164           single-crossing property, 457
                                              single-peaked preferences, 424
 random variable, 177                         slack constraint, 503
 rate of return, 368                          Slutsky compensation, 135
 rational expectations, 265                   Slutsky equation, 119, 137
 rationalizes, 38, 131                        social costs, 433
 reaction curve, 286                         social welfare function, 333
 reaction function, 422                      solution, 483, 485
recoverability, 138, 170                     solution curve, 485
   of a technology, 37                       stable, 288
 reduced form, 203                           Stackelberg model, 295
refinements, 272                             standard deviations, 373
reflexive preferences, 95                    state, 484
regression, 375                              state of nature, 190, 365
regression model, 200                        state space, 484
regular, 216                                 state-dependent utility functions, 190
regular maximum, 498                         states of nature, 370
regular technology, 9                        stock market, 342
relative prices, 319                         strategic complements, 287
rent, 351                                    strategic form, 260
replica, 390                                 strategic substitutes, 287
replication argument, 8, 15, 356             strategies, 260
representative consumer, 221                 strict maximum, 487
reservation price, 153, 416                  strict minimum, 487
residual claimant, 443                       strict preference, 95
residual demand curve, 298                   strictly concave, 488
restricted, 3, 26                            strictly convex, 482
restricted profit function, 26              strictly directly revealed preferred, 132
revealed preference, 132, 328, 347          strictly dominates, 272
revealed preferred, 132                     Strong Axiom of Revealed Preference,
risk aversion, 177                                132
risk loving, 177                            strongly Pareto efficient, 323
risk premium, 188, 369                      structural model, 202
Robinson Crusoe economy, 349                subgame, 275
Roy's identity, 106, 107, 149               subgame perfect, 275, 306, 437
                                            subjective probabilities, 191
scalar multiplication, 473                  subjective probability distribution, 264
Second Theorem of Welfare Economics,        substitutes, 60
     326, 346                               substitution effect, 120
second-degree price discrimination, 242,    substitution matrix, 34, 119, 123
      244                                   subutility, 150
second-order condition, 51, 488             supply function, 28, 216
self-selection constraints, 245, 460        supply price, 228
semi-logarithmic demand, 211                symmetric, 475
sensitivity analysis, 32, 491               system of differential equations, 485
separating equilibrium, 464                 system of partial differential equations,
sequence, 478                                     483
Shephard's lemma, 74, 75
short run, 2                                tangent hyperplane, 480
short-run cost function, 26                 target output scheme, 443
short-run production possibilities set, 3   tatonnement models, 398
short-run profit function, 26               Taylor series, 480
short-run variable cost, 65                 technical rate of substitution, 11
signal, 469                                 technique, 5, 355
simultaneous moves, 273                     technological constraints, 25
single crossing property, 245               technologically efficient, 4
 A42 INDEX




 technologically feasible, 1
 technology, 2-5
third-degree price discrimination, 242,
     248
total differential, 12
total return, 368
total surplus, 224
trajectory, 485
transformation function, 4
transitive closure, 132
transitive preferences, 95
translog cost function, 210
two part tariff, 254
two-stage least squares, 204
type, 279, 390

undercompensation function, 170
uninformed consumers, 293
uniqueness of equilibrium, 394
unit cost functions, 354
unstable, 288
upper contour set, 96, 480
upper-semicontinuous, 506
utility function, 95
utility possibility frontiers, 406

value function, 490
value tax, 228
variable factors, 65
variable-sum game, 261
variance, 486
variance of a sum, 486
vectors, 473
voting equilibrium, 424

Walras' law, 317, 343
Walrasian equilibrium, 316, 325
Weak Axiom of Cost Minimization
     (WACM), 61
Weak Axiom of Profit Maximization
     (WAPM), 35
Weak Axiom of Revealed Preference,
     132, 399
weak preference, 95
weakly dominates, 272
weakly Pareto efficient, 323
weakly separable, 150
welfare economics, 222
welfare function, 409

zerwsum game, 261
